Morphogenesis of the right ventricle requires myocardial
expression of 
Gata4
Elisabeth M. Zeisberg, … , Seigo Izumo, William T. Pu
J Clin Invest.
 2005;
115(6)
:1522-1531. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI23769
.
 
Mutations in developmental regulatory genes have been found to be responsible for some cases of congenital heart
defects. One such regulatory gene is 
Gata4
, a zinc finger transcription factor. In order to circumvent the early embryonic
lethality of 
Gata4
-null embryos and to investigate the role of myocardial 
Gata4
 expression in cardiac development, we
used Cre/loxP technology to conditionally delete 
Gata4
 in the myocardium of mice at an early and a late time point in
cardiac morphogenesis. Early deletion of 
Gata4
 by 
Nkx2-5
Cre
 resulted in hearts with striking myocardial thinning, absence
of mesenchymal cells within the endocardial cushions, and selective hypoplasia of the RV. RV hypoplasia was associated
with downregulation of 
Hand2
, a transcription factor previously shown to regulate formation of the RV. Cardiomyocyte
proliferation was reduced, with a greater degree of reduction in the RV than in the LV. Late deletion of 
Gata4
 by Cre
recombinase driven by the α 
myosin heavy chain
 promoter did not selectively affect RV development or generation of
endocardial cushion mesenchyme but did result in marked myocardial thinning with decreased cardiomyocyte
proliferation, as well as double-outlet RV. Our results demonstrate a general role of myocardial 
Gata4
 in regulating
cardiomyocyte proliferation and a specific, stage-dependent role in regulating the morphogenesis of the RV and the
atrioventricular canal.
Research Article
Cardiology
Find the latest version:
https://jci.me/23769/pdf

Research article
1522  The Journal of Clinical Investigation   http://www.jci.org    Volume 115    Number 6    June 2005Morphogenesis of the right ventricle requires 
myocardial expression of Gata4
Elisabeth M. Zeisberg,1,2 Qing Ma,3 Amy L. Juraszek,3,4 Kelvin Moses,5 Robert J. Schwartz,5  
Seigo Izumo,1 and William T. Pu3,6
1Cardiovascular Division and 2Center for Matrix Biology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. 3Department of Cardiology, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 4Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 5Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. 6Department of Pediatrics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Mutations in developmental regulatory genes have been found to be responsible for some cases of congenital 
heart defects. One such regulatory gene is Gata4 , a zinc finger transcription factor. In order to circumvent the 
early embryonic lethality of Gata4 -null embryos and to investigate the role of myocardial Gata4  expression in 
cardiac development, we used Cre/loxP technology to conditionally delete Gata4  in the myocardium of mice 
at an early and a late time point in cardiac morphogenesis. Early deletion of Gata4  by Nkx2-5Cre resulted in 
hearts with striking myocardial thinning, absence of mesenchymal cells within the endocardial cushions, and selective hypoplasia of the RV. RV hypoplasia was associated with downregulation of Hand2 , a transcription 
factor previously shown to regulate formation of the RV. Cardiomyocyte proliferation was reduced, with a greater degree of reduction in the RV than in the LV. Late deletion of Gata4  by Cre recombinase driven by the 
α myosin heavy chain  promoter did not selectively affect RV development or generation of endocardial cushion 
mesenchyme but did result in marked myocardial thinning with decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation, as well as double-outlet RV. Our results demonstrate a general role of myocardial Gata4  in regulating cardio
-
myocyte proliferation and a specific, stage-dependent role in regulating the morphogenesis of the RV and the atrioventricular canal.
Introduction
Congenital heart defects are the most common developmental anomaly in newborns (1). Formation of the normal heart involves 
the transformation of a linear heart tube into the mature 4-cham
-
bered organ. The linear heart tube grows rapidly by the prolifera -
tion of cardiomyocytes and by the addition of new cardiomyocytes 
to the arterial pole of the heart. These new cardiomyocytes, derived 
from splanchnic mesoderm adjoining the arterial pole of the heart 
(termed the secondary heart field), give rise to the outflow tract (OFT) and also contribute to the development of the RV (2–4). As the heart tube lengthens, it loops to the right, and the resulting 
structure is septated by growth and maturation of the endocardial 
cushions, structures derived from the endothelial lining of the heart by an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) (5).
Genetic dissection of heart development has shown that a hier
-
archy of transcription factors regulates these morphogenic events (6). Relatively independent genetic programs control the develop
-
ment of each heart chamber, which is consistent with the frequent occurrence of selective chamber hypoplasia in severe forms of con
-
genital heart disease (6). For example, during mouse heart develop -
ment, the transcription factor Hand2  (dHAND ) is predominantly 
expressed in the RV, while the related transcription factor Hand1  
(eHAND ) is predominantly expressed in the LV (7). Deletion of 
Hand2 results in severe hypoplasia of the RV segment (8).It has been found that some cases of congenital heart defects 
were caused by mutations in developmental regulatory genes. 
Mutation of the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2-5  is associated 
with familial congenital heart disease and has been associated with 
up to 4% of cases of tetralogy of Fallot and secundum atrial septal defect (9, 10). Haploinsufficiency for the transcription factor Tbx1
 
in patients with 22q11 chromosomal microdeletions causes OFT anomalies (11, 12), while mutation of the transcription factor Tbx5
 
is associated with congenital heart disease in Holt-Oram syndrome and in nonsyndromic congenital heart disease (13).
Recently, mutation of the transcription factor Gata4 was linked 
to congenital heart disease characterized by atrial or ventricular septal defects (14, 15). In the heart, Gata4  is expressed in cardio
-
myocytes and their mesodermal precursors, as well as in the endo -
cardium and the epicardium (Figure 1, E, F, I, and J, and Figure 5, A, C, and E). Gata4 binds to and regulates expression of a number 
of myocardium-expressed genes (16, 17). Embryos lacking Gata4
 
arrested in development and died due to a defect in the visceral 
endoderm that caused aberrant ventral morphogenesis and car -
diac bifida (18–20). Using alleles of Gata4 that cause partial loss of 
function, we and others have previously demonstrated that Gata4  
is required for later heart development (21, 22). However, these experiments were not able to address the tissue-restricted require
-
ments for Gata4 , particularly during early stages of heart devel -
opment. To evaluate the function of Gata4  within the myocardial 
compartment, we crossed floxed Gata4  mice with mouse lines in 
which expression of Cre recombinase is initiated within the myo -
cardium at an early and a late time point in cardiac development. We found that myocardial expression of Gata4  was required in a 
stage-dependent manner for proliferation of cardiomyocytes, for
-
mation of the endocardial cushions, development of the RV, and septation of the OFT.Nonstandard abbreviations used:  ANT , atrial natriuretic factor ; BNP , brain natriuretic 
peptide ; EMT, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; G4MC, Gata4flox/flox ;MHCαCre+; 
G4NK, Gata4flox/flox ;Nkx2-5WT/Cre ; MHC, myosin heavy chain; MHC αCre; α MHC  
promoter driving Cre recombinase expression; OFT, outflow tract; qRT-PCR,  
quantitative RT-PCR; TNC , tenascin C .
Conflict of interest:  The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Citation for this article:  J. Clin. Invest.  115:1522–1531 (2005).  
doi:10.1172/JCI23769.
research article
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005 1523Results
Myocardial-restricted deletion of Gata4 early in cardiac development . Pre -
viously, in order to study the temporal and spatial requirements for Gata4  in heart development, we generated a floxed Gata4  allele 
(Gata4flox) in which exon 2, containing the start codon and 46% of 
the coding sequence, is flanked by loxP sites (22). Expression of Cre recombinase resulted in deletion of exon 2, yielding a null allele 
(22). In order to investigate the cardiomyocyte-restricted function of 
Gata4  in cardiac development, we used Cre/loxP technology to con
-
ditionally ablate Gata4  in cardiomyocytes at 2 distinct time points 
in cardiac development. We achieved early cardiomyocyte-restricted 
deletion of Gata4  using Nkx2-5Cre, in which Cre recombinase expres -
sion is driven by the endogenous Nkx2-5  locus (23). We previously 
reported that Nkx2-5Cre initiated Cre expression around E7.5 in the 
cardiac progenitor pool and that robust Cre-mediated recombi -nation occurred in cardiomyocytes by E9.5 (23). In 
order to further delineate the temporal and spatial pattern of Cre activity, we crossed Nkx2-5
Cre mice 
with R26Rstop lacZ mice, in which expression of lacZ 
requires Cre-mediated excision of a stop cassette (24). Consistent with our prior results (23), Nkx2-5
Cre acti-
vated lacZ expression in most cardiomyocytes of E9.5 
embryos (arrows, Figure 1, B and C). Cre-mediated 
expression of lacZ did not occur in the endocardium 
(arrowheads, Figure 1, B and C) or in the proepicar -
dial organ (Figure 1A). Outside the heart, lacZ  activ -
ity was detected in the pharyngeal endoderm and in 
a patchy distribution in branchial arch epithelium 
(Figure 1A and Figure 4, A–C).
Next, we obtained Gata4flox/flox ;Nkx2-5WT/Cre  (G4NK) 
embryos from timed matings and we confirmed loss 
of the Gata4  transcript in G4NK hearts by quantita -
tive RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and in situ hybridization. Gata4  expression was reduced 90% in G4
NK hearts 
compared with that in controls ( P < 0.05; n = 3; Fig -
ure 1D), while the expression of the closely related gene Gata6  was unaffected (Figure 1D). In situ 
hybridization showed that Gata4  expression in the 
myocardium was not detectable above background by E9.5 in G4
NK embryos (compare red arrowheads 
in Figure 1H and Figure 1F). Surprisingly, we found that Gata4  expression in the endocardium was also 
reduced to background levels in G4
NK embryos 
(compare yellow arrowheads in Figure 1H and Fig -
ure 1F). Gata5 and Gata6 expression was not altered 
in G4NK embryos (Supplemental Figure 3; supple -
mental material available online with this article; doi:10.1172/JCI23769DS1).
To further confirm the loss of myocardial 
and endocardial Gata4  expression, we exam
-
ined Gata4 protein expression in G4NK hearts by 
immunofluorescence staining (Figure 1, I–L). In control embryos, robust Gata4 staining (red stain) 
was localized to the nucleus (blue stain) of cardio
-
myocytes and endocardial cells (Figure 1, I and J). 
However, in G4NK embryos, Gata4 signal was strong -
ly decreased in both cardiomyocytes and endocardial cells (Figure 1, K and L). As the antibody used recog
-
nizes a peptide in the C terminus of Gata4, loss of immunoreactivity in G4
NK hearts suggests that exci -
sion of the floxed region of Gata4  (exon 2, encod -
ing the N-terminal portion of Gata4  including the start codon) 
resulted in loss of Gata4 protein. Loss of endocardial Gata4  expres -
sion was not due to a generalized defect in endothelial differentia -
tion into endocardium, as the endocardial-specific marker Nfatc1 was expressed normally in G4
NK hearts (Supplemental Figure 1). 
Because Cre activity was absent in the endocardium of Nkx2-5Cre 
hearts (Figure 1, B and C), loss of endocardial Gata4  expression 
in G4NK hearts suggests that a paracrine signal derived from the 
myocardium regulates endocardial Gata4 expression.
Early cardiomyocyte-restricted ablation of Gata4  in G4NK embryos  
resulted in lethality by E11.5 (Figure 2A). However, overall devel -
opment of G4NK embryos at E9.5, as assessed by the number of 
somites, was not impaired (control, 20.8 ± 2.8 somites, n = 15; 
mutant, 21.7 ± 0.5 somites, n = 7). By E10.5, G4NK embryos were 
Figure 1
Early cardiomyocyte-restricted inactivation of Gata4  by Nkx2-5Cre. (A–C) The spatial 
pattern of recombination driven by Nkx2-5Cre was determined using the R26Rstop lacZ 
reporter. X-gal–stained E9.5 embryos were examined in whole-mount ( A) or in trans -
verse sections ( B and C). Strong staining was detected in cardiomyocytes (arrows, 
B and C) of the atrium (A) and ventricle (V). Weaker activity was detected in the 
branchial arch (I–III), epithelium, and pharyngeal endoderm (PE). No Cre activity was 
detected in the proepicardial organ (PEO) or endocardium (arrowheads). ( D) Efficient 
inactivation of Gata4  by Nkx2-5Cre. Gata4  and Gata6  expression was measured by 
qRT-PCR in RNA isolated from hearts of E9.5 control ( Gata4flox/flox , black bars) or 
G4NK embryos (red bars). Gata4  expression was downregulated in G4NK embryos 
compared with that of controls ( n = 3; *P < 0.05). ( E–H) In situ hybridization for Gata4. 
Gata4 expression was robust in myocardium (red arrowheads), endocardium (yellow arrowheads), and endocardial cushions (asterisk) of control embryos (
E and F) but 
was not detectable in G4NK embryos ( G and H). Shown are brightfield ( E and G) and 
darkfield views ( F and H). (I–L) Immunofluorescent detection of Gata4  in control ( I and 
J) and G4NK embryos ( K and L). Gata4  staining was strongly reduced in cardiomyo -
cytes (red arrowheads) and endocardial cells (yellow arrowheads) of G4NK embryos. 
J and L show the same field as I and K, with the addition of green labeling of cardio -
myocytes (desmin). Red staining indicates Gata4 ; blue staining denotes nuclei; purple 
staining indicates colocalization of Gata4  in the nucleus. Original magnification, ×40 
(A). Scale bars: 100 μm (B, C, and E–L).
research article
1524  The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005mildly delayed in overall development (control, 31.6 ± 2.2 somites, 
n = 19; mutant, 28.5 ± 2.2 somites, n = 6; P < 0.05) and had large 
pericardial effusions, a sign of heart failure (compare Figure 2B 
and Figure 2C).
At E9.5, most G4NK embryos could be recognized on whole-
mount examination by characteristic cardiac malformations. G4NK 
embryos had normally positioned atria and intact atrioventricular grooves (arrowheads, Figure 2, D–F). Fifteen of 21 G4
NK embryos 
systematically examined in whole mount displayed a single pre -
dominant ventricular chamber that connected to an OFT located toward the rostral side of the chamber (compare arrows in Figure 
2G and Figure 2I). The remaining 6 of 21 G4
NK embryos had nor -
mal- to mildly hypoplastic–appearing RVs that connected to nor -
mally positioned OFTs (Figure 2, H and O). On histological sec -
tions, all G4NK embryos displayed marked myocardial hypoplasia, 
affecting both the compact and trabecular myocardium (Figure 
2, J–M). The atrioventricular and OFT endocardial cushions were 
small and contained few mesenchymal cells (arrowheads, Figure 2, 
J, K, N, and O), which indicates a defect in the EMT of endocardial cells that normally generates cushion mesenchyme. This defect was due at least in part to the aforementioned downregulation of Gata4
 
in the endocardium, as we have found that expression of Gata4  in the endocardium is required for EMT (J. Rivera-Feliciano et al., manuscript submitted for publication).
Myocardial Gata4 regulates formation of the RV . Early myocyte-
restricted deletion of Gata4  in G4
NK embryos resulted in the forma -
tion of a single predominant ventricular chamber in the majority of embryos (Figure 2, I and P). In order to determine the molecular 
identity of the chamber, we examined the expression of chamber-
specific markers. In normal embryos, at E9.5 the atrial chamber expressed myosin light chain 2a  (MLC2a ) but not MLC2v , while the 
ventricular chambers expressed both MLC2a  and MLC2v . This 
expression pattern was maintained in G4
NK hearts (Supplemental 
Figure 2), which indicates that specification of atrial and ventricu -
lar chambers occurs normally in G4NK hearts. The genes Hand1  and 
Tbx5  are normally expressed at higher levels in the LV than in the 
RV (8, 25). In G4NK hearts, the expression pattern of Hand1  and 
Tbx5  was not altered, with the predominant ventricular chamber 
preferentially expressing these markers (Figure 3, I and J, and data 
not shown). These data indicate that the predominant ventricular 
chamber in G4NK hearts is the LV. The data also demonstrate that 
Hand1 is not directly regulated by Gata4 .
To determine whether a hypoplastic RV was incorporated into the 
tubular structure connecting the predominant ventricular chamber Figure 2
Phenotypic characterization of mutants after early cardiomyocyte-
restricted Gata4  deletion. ( A) Survival of mutant embryos after 
myocyte-restricted deletion of Gata4 . Numbers indicate total number 
of embryos genotyped at each gestational age. Expected Mendelian incidence was 25%. (
B and C) Unstained whole-mount control and 
G4NK embryos at E10.5, showing pericardial effusion (white arrows) 
of the mutant embryo. ( D–I) Control and mutant hearts, viewed from 
the left lateral ( D–F) and right anterior oblique ( G–I) positions. In 
control ( G) and in 6 of 21 mutant ( H) embryos systematically exam -
ined, the RV and OFT (arrows) connected normally to the right lat -
eral aspect of the LV. In the remaining 15 of 21 mutant embryos, the RV was very hypoplastic or not apparent, and the OFT connected to the rostral aspect of the LV (
I). The groove at the atrioventricu -
lar junction (arrowhead) was preserved in mutant embryos. ( J–P). 
H&E-stained transverse sections at the level of the atrioventricular canal (
J and K) and the OFT ( N–P). (L and M) Higher-magnifica -
tion views of boxed regions in J and K, respectively. Mutant embry -
os had severe myocardial hypoplasia with reduced trabeculation. Arrowheads indicate the endocardial cushions, which were small and markedly hypocellular in mutant embryos (
K and O) compared 
with those of controls ( J and N). In some mutant embryos, the RV 
and OFT were thin walled but normally positioned ( O), while in other 
mutant embryos the RV was not apparent, and the OFT arose in an abnormal position from the ventricular chamber (
P). Embryos in D–P 
had 31–32 somites. Original magnification, ×20 (B and C), ×60 (D–I). 
Scale bars: 100 μm (J–P).

research article
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005 1525to the aortic sac in mutant embryos, we examined the expression of 
the OFT marker tenascin C ( TNC) by in situ hybridization. In con -
trol embryos, the entire length of the OFT from the morphological RV to the aortic sac expressed TNC (Supplemental Figure 2) (26). 
In contrast, in G4
NK embryos with a single predominant chamber, 
TNC  was expressed in the distal end of the OFT. However, the proxi -
mal end of the outflow tube near its junction with the predomi -
nant ventricular chamber was TNC  negative (Supplemental Figure 
2) and likely represented a severely hypoplastic RV.
The RV hypoplasia found in G4NK hearts was highly reminiscent of 
the phenotype of Hand2 -null embryos, which failed to form the RV 
(8). Hand2  is expressed in the limb buds, the branchial arches, and 
the myocardium of the OFT and the RV (8). By both whole-mount and section in situ hybridization, we found that Hand2  transcript 
levels were decreased in G4
NK hearts compared with those in con -
trols (Figure 3, A–F). The decrease in Hand2  transcript level was not 
due to nonspecific RNA degradation, as adjoining sections from the 
same embryo yielded robust signals to other probes (e.g., Hand1 , Fig-
ure 3J). Decreased Hand2  levels were also not simply a consequence 
of hypoplasia of the RV, as Hand2  expression in the OFT was also 
strongly downregulated (arrows, Figure 3, E and F). Hand2  remained 
robustly expressed in the branchial arches of mutant embryos 
(arrowheads, Figure 3, A–F). These data demonstrate that normal expression of Hand2  requires Gata4  and suggest that abnormal regu
-
lation of Hand2  in G4NK mutants contributes at least in part to the 
selective requirement of Gata4  for RV development.
The RV and OFT are derived at least in part from cardiomyocytes 
generated in a secondary heart field located at the junction of the splanchnic mesoderm with the caudal surface of the OFT (2–4). In chicken embryos, this secondary heart field contains progenitor cells that express both Nkx2-5  and Gata4  (2). One hypothesis to 
account for the RV hypoplasia seen in G4
NK mutants is that Gata4  
inactivation in these progenitors impairs formation or migration of cardiomyocytes destined to contribute to the RV. To address this hypothesis, we assessed the timing and 
location within the secondary heart field of Gata4 , -
5, 
and - 6 expression and of Cre activity driven by Nkx2-5Cre. 
By E9.5, when RV hypoplasia became apparent, few cells 
within this region had undergone recombination to 
express lacZ (Figure 4, A and B). At E10.5, we found that 
Nkx2-5Cre activation of the R26Rstop lacZ reporter within 
the splanchnic mesoderm was more robust (Figure 4C), 
as has been previously reported (27). More importantly, 
we found that Gata4  was not expressed in splanchnic 
mesoderm at its junction with the OFT in wild-type 
embryos (arrowheads, Figure 4, E and I), while Gata5  
and Gata6  were expressed in this region (arrowheads, 
Figure 4, F, G, J, and K). These data indicate that Gata4  
inactivation by Nkx2-5Cre in the secondary heart field is 
not responsible for hypoplasia of the RV.
Myocardial-restricted deletion of Gata4 late in cardiac devel -
opment . In order to study the function of myocardial 
Gata4  expression at a late time in heart development, we 
used transgenic mice in which Cre recombinase expres -
sion was driven by the α myosin heavy chain (MHC) 
promoter (MHC αCre). Prior characterization of this 
transgene demonstrated that MHC αCre catalyzed 
recombination only in the myocardium, starting at E9.5 and occurring in nearly all cardiomyocytes by E11.5 
(28). We isolated Gata4
flox/flox ;MHCαCre+ (G4MC) embryos 
at E12.5 and examined Gata4  expression by in situ hybridization 
and immunohistochemistry. In control embryos, Gata4  expression 
was readily detected in myocardium (white arrowheads, Figure 5, 
A, C, and E), endocardium (yellow arrowheads, Figure 5, A and E), endocardial cushions (asterisk, Figure 5A), and epicardium (blue arrowheads, Figure 5, C and E). In G4
MC embryos, myocar -
dial Gata4  expression was strongly reduced in both compact and 
trabecular myocardium (compare Figure 5, D and F with Figure 5, 
C and E), while Gata4  continued to be expressed in epicardium and 
endocardium (blue and yellow arrowheads, Figure 5, B, D, and F). 
Expression of Gata5  and Gata6  were not altered in G4MC embryos 
(Supplemental Figure 4).
Late cardiomyocyte-restricted deletion of Gata4  by MHC αCre 
resulted in lethality by E14.5 (Figure 2A). Mutant embryos had marked myocardial hypoplasia and double-outlet RV (Figure 5, G–L). 
 
While early excision of Gata4  by Nkx2-5Cre resulted in the forma -
tion of a single predominant ventricular chamber in the majority of embryos, 2 well-formed ventricles were present after late Gata4
 
inactivation by MHC αCre. In G4MC hearts, as in control hearts, 
the atrioventricular cushion divided the atrioventricular canal into separate RV and LV inflow tracts (asterisk, Figure 5, G and J). 
This result indicates that, unlike early myocardial Gata4  deletion, 
late deletion does not impair initial steps of atrioventricular valve 
morphogenesis, including generation of cushion mesenchyme and growth and fusion of the atrioventricular endocardial cushions.
Myocardial Gata4 regulates cardiomyocyte proliferation . Hypopla
-
sia of the myocardium was a prominent feature after both early and late myocyte-restricted Gata4 deletion. This phenotype could 
have been due to increased cardiomyocyte apoptosis or decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation. TUNEL staining of G4
NK and G4MC 
embryos at E9.0 and E12.5 showed that cardiomyocyte apoptosis did not increase compared with that of control littermates (data 
not shown). To determine whether myocardial Gata4  inactivation 
Figure 3
Expression of Hand  genes after early myocyte-restricted Gata4  deletion. ( A–F) 
Whole-mount ( A and B) and section ( C–F) in situ hybridization for Hand2. In the 
hearts of control embryos ( A, C, and E), Hand2 was predominantly expressed in 
the RV and OFT (arrows), although its expression was also detected in the LV. 
In G4NK embryos ( B, D, and F), Hand2  expression was significantly decreased 
in the hypoplastic RV and OFT (arrows). Expression of Hand2  was detected in 
the branchial arches of both control and G4NK embryos (arrowheads). ( G–J) Sec -
tion in situ hybridization for Hand1. Hand1 expression was unchanged in mutant 
embryos compared with that in control embryos, localizing predominantly to the outer curvature of the LV (arrows), as well as to the branchial arches (arrow
-
heads). Adjacent sections from the same mutant embryo were used in F and J. 
Brightfield ( C, D, G, and H) and darkfield views ( E, F, I, and J) are shown. Original 
magnification, ×32 ( A and B). Scale bars: 100 μm (C–J).
research article
1526  The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005decreases cardiomyocyte proliferation, we measured cardiomyocyte 
proliferation by BrdU labeling. After both early and late Gata4  dele -
tion, the percentage of myocytes labeled by BrdU was significantly decreased (
P < 0.05; Figure 6, A–H, and Table 1). Similar results 
were obtained in G4NK embryos when cardiomyocyte proliferation 
was measured by staining for the M phase–specific marker phos -
phohistone H3 (data not shown). Early Gata4  inactivation resulted 
in selective RV hypoplasia (Figure 2), while late Gata4  inactivation 
did not (Figure 5). Consistent with these phenotypes, cardiomyo -
cyte proliferation was more severely reduced in the RV than in the LV after early Gata4  inactivation (Figure 6, A–F), but the reductions 
did not differ between RV and LV after late Gata4  inactivation (Fig
-
ure 6, G and H). These data suggest that Gata4  is required in a cell-
autonomous manner for normal proliferation of cardiomyocytes 
and that reduced cardiomyocyte proliferation might contribute to 
the selective RV hypoplasia seen in G4NK hearts.
In order to identify transcriptional targets of Gata4  that may 
mediate the effect of Gata4  on cardiomyocyte proliferation, we asked 
whether expression of myocardial genes known to be important for myocardial growth was perturbed by Gata4  deletion. cyclin D1–D3
 
regulate the core cell-cycle machinery in response to mitogenic stimulation (29), and in other systems Gata4  regulates prolifera
-
tion by activating cyclin D2  expression (30). Bmp10  and Hop are both 
required for normal myocardial growth, and expression of both is regulated by Nkx2-5 , which can coordinate with Gata4  
to regulate gene transcription (31, 32). qRT-PCR analy -
sis of RNA isolated from G4MC and Gata4flox/flox  control 
hearts showed no difference in the expression of Bmp10  
(Figure 6I). Expression of Hop tended to be reduced in 
G4MC hearts, but this did not reach statistical signifi -
cance (Figure 6I). Unexpectedly, cyclin D1–D3  were not 
downregulated in G4MC hearts; rather, each was subtly 
but significantly upregulated ( P < 0.05; Figure 6I). This 
indicates that Gata4  does not directly regulate cardio -
myocyte proliferation through cyclin D1–D3 . Instead, 
cyclin D1–D3  upregulation may be a compensatory 
response to altered expression of other components of the cell-cycle machinery following Gata4  deletion.
Myocardial gene expression downstream of Gata4 . Gata4
 
has been implicated in the expression of a large num -
ber of myocardial genes, including the transcription factors Mef2c , Carp , and Nkx2-5 , each of which is 
essential for normal cardiac morphogenesis (33–37). To determine whether abnormalities of cardiac mor
-
phogenesis seen in G4NK or G4MC mutants could be 
attributed to altered transcription of these genes in vivo, we measured transcript levels by qRT-PCR on 
RNA isolated from control and mutant hearts (Figure 
7A). We found that expression of Mef2c and Carp were 
not significantly altered in mutant hearts after early or late myocardial Gata4  deletion (Figure 7A). Nkx2-5
  
expression was reduced by 50% in G4NK hearts, but 
this decrease was expected due to haploinsufficiency for Nkx2-5 . After late myocyte-restricted Gata4  dele
-
tion, Nkx2-5  expression was upregulated 1.7-fold in 
G4NK hearts compared with that of controls ( P < 0.05; 
Figure 7A). We previously found a similar degree of Nkx2-5  upregulation in E12.5 hearts with a germline 
mutation that reduced Gata4  expression by 70% (22). 
This might reflect upregulation secondary to heart 
failure, since Nkx2-5 has previously been shown to be upregulated 
as a result of increased wall stress (38).
Gata4 has also been implicated in the expression of a number of 
cardiomyocyte structural genes. We measured the expression of 4 well-characterized Gata4  targets in G4
MC hearts compared with that 
in controls. Surprisingly, we found that levels of atrial natriuretic 
factor  (ANF ), brain natriuretic peptide  (BNP ), and MHCβ expression 
were unaltered in G4MC hearts (Figure 7B). MHCα expression was 
downregulated 2-fold after late myocyte-restricted Gata4 deletion 
(P < 0.05; Figure 7B), which is consistent with the prior finding 
that GATA binding sites in the proximal MHCα promoter are 
required for promoter activity in vitro (39).
Analysis of the ANF  promoter in transgenic Xenopus  embryos 
suggests that GATA binding sites in the ANF promoter are crucial 
for spatially restricting ANF expression from the OFT, rather than 
for determining the level of expression (40). To determine whether Gata4  is required to similarly restrict the spatial distribution of 
ANF  expression in mouse embryos, we used in situ hybridization 
to examine ANF  expression after cardiomyocyte-restricted inacti
-
vation of Gata4 . ANF  is normally expressed in atrial and ventricular 
chamber myocardium, but not in the atrioventricular canal or OFT 
myocardium (41). In G4NK hearts, ANF was expressed at compara -
ble levels in atrial and ventricular chamber myocardium. However, 
in 2 out of 6 G4NK embryos, ANF  expression extended ectopically, 
Figure 4
Pattern of Gata4 , Gata5 , and Gata6  expression and Nkx2-5Cre activity in the sec -
ondary heart field. ( A–C) Nkx2-5Cre activation of the R26Rstop lacZ reporter in the 
splanchnic mesoderm at its junction with the OFT (secondary heart field; arrow -
heads) at E9.5 (transverse section, A; sagittal section, B) and at E10.5 (sagittal 
section, C). Recombination in splanchnic mesoderm was detected in rare cells at 
E9.5 but was robust by E10.5. AS, aortic sac; BA, branchial arch. ( D–K) Adjacent 
transverse sections of the same E9.5 control embryo (22 somites) were hybridized 
to probes for Gata4 , Gata5 , and Gata6  (in situ signal displayed as red pseudocolor). 
Gata5  and Gata6  were detected in the splanchnic mesoderm (SM; arrowheads) and 
pharyngeal endoderm (data not shown). Gata4  was not expressed in the splanchnic 
mesoderm, but was detected in the myocardium and endocardium. Sections in D–G 
were at the level of the caudal surface of the OFT (asterisk), while the plane of sec -
tion in H–K was slightly more cranial, sectioned at the junction of the OFT with the 
aortic sac. Scale bars: 100 μm.
research article
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005 1527well into the myocardium connecting the predominant ventricular 
chamber to the OFT (Figure 7C). Thus, in vivo Gata4  is necessary 
to consistently restrict the ANF expression domain in mice, which 
is consistent with the requirement for GATA sites in the ANF pro -
moter to restrict the ANF expression domain in Xenopus (40).
DiscussionTo determine the myocyte-restricted function of Gata4  in heart 
development, we characterized embryos in which Gata4  was inac
-
tivated at an early and a late time point in heart development. Our results demonstrate distinct temporal requirements for myocardi
-
al expression of Gata4 in the regulation of cardiac morphogenesis. 
Early myocardial expression of Gata4  was necessary for normal 
cardiac expression of Hand2  and for normal development of the 
RV. Early expression of Gata4  in myocardium was also necessary to 
support endocardial Gata4 expression and endocardial EMT. Late 
loss of myocardial Gata4  expression did not selectively affect RV 
development but did result in abnormal OFT septation, manifest -
ed as double-outlet RV. Both early and late in cardiac development, normal cardiomyocyte proliferation required expression of Gata4
.Recently, tetraploid aggregation of Gata4 -null embryonic 
stem cells was used to bypass the early developmental arrest of Gata4 -null embryos (42). As in our embryos with cardiomyocyte-
restricted Gata4 deletion, tetraploid-rescued null embryos formed 
a thin, poorly trabeculated heart tube. However, early cardiomyo
-
cyte-restricted Gata4  inactivation resulted in a milder phenotype 
than in tetraploid-rescued Gata4 -null embryos, since the latter 
had incomplete segmentation and looping of the heart tube. This indicates that they arrested earlier in heart development than did our embryos with early myocyte-restricted Gata4  inactivation 
(G4NK). Tetraploid-rescued Gata4 -null embryos lacked a proepicar -
dial organ. This, in conjunction with the relatively unperturbed expression of myocardial genes, led the authors to conclude that 
disruption of myocardial development is non–cell autonomous 
and perhaps due to loss of signals from the proepicardial organ (42). However, our data directly demonstrate an important cardio
-
myocyte-autonomous function for Gata4 in cardiomyocyte prolif -
eration and RV formation. The G4NK phenotype is milder than the 
tetraploid-rescued Gata4 -null phenotype, which supports addi -
tional roles for Gata4 expression in non-myocyte lineages to regu -
late cardiac morphogenesis. Alternatively, the difference in pheno -
type may reflect a later deletion of Gata4 in the G4NK hearts.
Because G4NK embryos are haploinsufficient for Nkx2-5 , it is pos -
sible that reduced Nkx2-5  dosage also contributed to the phenotype 
observed in G4NK embryos. However, this is unlikely for several rea -
sons. First, Nkx2-5  is not a direct regulator of RV specification or 
Hand2  expression (43). Second, tetraploid-rescued Gata4 -null hearts 
(42) had abnormalities similar to, but more severe than, G4NK hearts, 
which indicates that these phenotypes also occur in Gata4 -null 
embryos that have a normal dose of Nkx2-5 . Third, while Nkx2-5  
haploinsufficiency is associated with atrial septal defects and con -
Figure 5
Late cardiomyocyte-restricted Gata4  deletion by MHC αCre. ( A–D) 
Gata4  in situ hybridization (red pseudocolor) on sections from E12.5 
G4MC and control embryos, showing inactivation of Gata4  in the myo -
cardium after late cardiomyocyte-restricted Gata4  deletion (white 
arrowheads, compare A and C with B and D). Expression of Gata4 in 
endocardium (yellow arrowheads) and endocardial cushions (aster -
isks) was unchanged in G4MC hearts compared with controls. Red 
blood cells gave a nonspecific signal in darkfield (red arrowhead, B). 
Blue staining indicates nuclei. Blue arrowheads indicate epicardium. 
(E and F) Reduced myocardial expression of Gata4 in E12.5 G4MC 
embryos compared with littermate controls. In the control ventricle ( E), 
Gata4 staining was detected in myocardium (white arrowheads), epi -
cardium (blue arrowheads), and endocardium (yellow arrowheads). 
Some myocyte nuclei in control embryos appeared Gata4 negative (white arrow). In the mutant ventricle (
F), Gata4 was present in epicar -
dium and endocardium but not in myocardium. Red staining indicates Gata4 ; green staining indicates desmin; blue staining indicates nuclei 
(TOPRO3). (
G–L) Cardiac malformations after late cardiomyocyte-
restricted Gata4 deletion. Transverse sections of E13.5 embryos were 
stained with H&E. G4MC embryos ( J–L) had marked hypoplasia of the 
compact myocardium (arrowheads) and reduced trabecular myocar -
dium compared with that of control embryos ( G–I). The aortic valve 
(AoV; H and K) and pulmonary valve (PV; I and L) arose from the RV 
in mutant embryos, which indicates the presence of a double-outlet RV. The atrioventricular canal was properly septated into right and left inflow channels by the endocardial cushions (asterisks), which were normally populated by mesenchymal cells (
G and J). Scale bars: 100 
μm (A–D), 50 μm (E and F), 200 μm (G–L).
research article
1528  The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005duction system abnormalities (44, 45), it has not been reported to 
result in an observable phenotype at this early stage of heart devel -
opment. Finally, the myocardial hypoplasia of G4NK embryos was 
also seen in G4MC embryos, which expressed slightly elevated levels of 
Nkx2-5 . Nevertheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that Nkx2-5  
haploinsufficiency contributed to the G4NK phenotype and to the 
differences between the phenotype of G4NK and G4MC hearts.
Gata4 regulates RV development . Severe hypoplasia of the RV 
occurred in most mutant embryos after early cardiomyocyte-
restricted deletion, which indicates that Gata4  plays an essential 
role in RV morphogenesis. Results of previous work have suggested 
that the OFT and at least a portion of the RV are derived from pro -
genitors located within the secondary heart field (2–4). In chicks, cells within the secondary heart field express Gata4  and Nkx2-5
 
(2), and in mice, a secondary heart field enhancer has been shown to be dependent upon Gata  activity (33). However, we found that 
in mice, Gata4 was not expressed within the secondary heart field, 
whereas Gata5  and Gata6  were robustly expressed in this region, 
which suggests that the Gata  isoforms active in the splanchnic 
mesoderm are species specific. In addition, the Nkx2-5
Cre–mediated 
excision in the secondary heart field occurred in a minority of cells at E9.5 (Figure 4, A and B), when hypoplasia of the RV was already 
apparent. These data indicate that hypoplasia of the RV in G4
NK 
mutant embryos was not due to Gata4  inactivation in RV precur -
sors within the secondary heart field. Inactivation of Gata4 within 
cells originating from the secondary heart field might occur after they have migrated into the heart tube and differentiated into car
-diomyocytes; thus, our data are consistent with an important role of the secondary heart field in the development of the RV.
We found that RV hypoplasia after early myocyte-restricted 
Gata4  inactivation was associated with a decrease in cardiomyo
-
cyte proliferation that was more severe in the RV than in the LV. At 
E9.5, RV cardiomyocytes may be more dependent upon Gata4  for 
normal rates of proliferation than are LV cardiomyocytes. Alterna -
tively, Gata4  inactivation in RV cardiomyocyte precursors originat -
ing from the secondary heart field might impair their migration, expansion, or differentiation, which ultimately might be mani
-
fested as a decrease in cardiomyocyte proliferation. Distinguish -
ing these models will require mapping the fate of RV progenitors in the G4
NK mutant background.
The failure of RV development after early cardiomyocyte-restrict -
ed inactivation of Gata4  was associated with downregulation of 
Hand2  in the RV and the OFT. Hand2  itself has been shown to be 
necessary for RV formation (8), which suggests that altered regula -
tion of Hand2  in G4NK embryos may contribute at least in part to 
the abnormal RV morphogenesis seen in these mutant embryos. Previous work has demonstrated that cardiac expression of Hand2
 
is regulated by a GATA-dependent enhancer and that ablation of GATA sites within this enhancer dramatically reduces RV expres
-
sion driven by this promoter in transgenic mice (46). These find -
ings suggest that Hand2 downregulation in G4NK mice might be a 
direct result of decreased Gata4  binding to Hand2  regulatory ele -
Figure 6
Decreased myocyte proliferation in mutants lacking myocardial Gata4  
expression. ( A–H) Cardiomyocyte staining was assessed by BrdU label -
ing (red stain). Nuclei were counterstained with TOPRO3 (blue stain), 
and cardiomyocytes were identified by desmin staining (green stain). 
(A–F) Decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation in early myocyte-restrict -
ed Gata4 -ablated ( G4NK) hearts at E9.5 (control, 21 .4 ± 1 .2 somites; 
mutant, 20.8 ± 0.7 somites). Arrows indicate representative BrdU-posi -
tive myocyte nuclei. Sagittal sections from the same control ( A, C, and 
D) or G4NK (B, E, and F) embryo are shown. ( D and F) Higher magnifica -
tion views of the boxed regions in A and B. (G and H) Decreased car -
diomyocyte proliferation in late myocyte-restricted Gata4  ablated ( G4MC) 
hearts at E12.5. Arrows indicate representative BrdU-positive myocyte nuclei. (
I) Expression of candidate Gata4  target genes that control car -
diomyocyte proliferation. RNA was isolated from E12.5 G4MC (red bars) 
and control hearts (black bars). * P < 0.05. Scale bars: 100 μm.
Table 1
Quantitative analysis of cellular proliferation in G4NK and G4MC 
hearts
 Control Mutant P
G4NK
Atria (%) 19 ± 3 8 ± 3 < 0.05
LV (%) 33 ± 3 18 ± 2 < 0.01
RV (%) 28 ± 2 13 ± 2 < 0.01
OFT (%) 13 ± 2 10 ± 3 NS
RV/LV (%) 88 ± 6 62 ± 4 < 0.05
G4MC
LV (%) 31 ± 4 21 ± 6 < 0.05
RV (%) 32 ± 3 17 ± 3 <0.05
RV/LV (%) 104 ± 10 87 ± 8 NS
Each group contained 3 to 5 embryos, each sectioned in 2 to 4 planes at least 40 
μm apart.
research article
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005 1529ments. Interestingly, the GATA-dependent Hand2  enhancer retains 
expression in Gata4 -null mice, which may be due to functional sub -
stitution by Gata5  and Gata6  (46). The difference in normal Hand2  
enhancer activity in Gata4 -null embryos versus decreased Hand2  
expression in G4NK embryos might be due to the failure of Gata4 -
null embryos to develop to the stage at which the Hand2  enhancer 
requires Gata4  function, as they arrest in development before E8.5.
Our results indicate that a Gata4  transcriptional program is 
essential for RV formation and suggest that Hand2  likely functions 
downstream of Gata4  as a component of this program. Intriguingly, 
ablation of Hand  genes was found to result in myocardial hypopla -
sia but was not associated with a change in cardiomyocyte prolif -
eration (47). These results suggest that while Hand2  likely contrib -
utes to the RV hypoplasia seen in G4NK embryos, other genes that 
influence cardiomyocyte proliferation must also be downstream of 
Gata4  and contribute to the phenotype. The transcription factor 
Nkx2-5  was previously reported to regulate expression of Hand1  but 
not Hand2  (43). Hand1  is predominantly expressed in the LV and is 
an important regulator of myocardial growth and heart tube loop -
ing (48, 49); these findings led to the suggestion that Nkx2-5  and 
Hand1  selectively regulate LV formation (50). Thus, we propose a 
model in which Gata4  acts through Hand2  and other genetic path -
ways to regulate RV development, while Nkx2-5  acts in conjunction 
with Hand1  to regulate LV development (Figure 7D).
Severe hypoplasia of the RV was present in most, but not all, G4NK 
embryos. The incomplete penetrance of this phenotype was likely due to several factors. First, it is likely that subtle interembryo vari
-
ability in the timing and extent of Cre-mediated Gata4  inactiva -
tion occurred, which might result in different developmental out -
comes. Second, the experiments were performed in a mixed genetic background, and genetic background has a strong influence on RV morphogenesis in the setting of decreased Gata4 expression, as 
indicated by our finding that some Gata4  heterozygous mice had 
RV hypoplasia in a pure C57BL/6 background but not in a mixed genetic background (data not shown).
Downstream targets of Gata4 . Previous in vitro and in vivo pro
-
moter analysis has implicated Gata4  in the regulation of a num -
ber of genes that play important roles in cellular proliferation, heart development, and myocardial contraction (16). Using 
qRT-PCR, we measured the expression level of 8 genes puta
-
tively activated by Gata4  (cyclin D2 , Nkx2-5 , Mef2c , Carp , MHCα, 
MHCβ, ANF , and BNP ) and found that only MHCα expression 
was downregulated in a manner suggestive of a required role 
for Gata4  in activation of gene transcription. This might have 
been due to functional redundancy with other Gata factors. Gata6  was expressed in myocardium at both E9.5 and E12.5, 
and its expression was not altered by Gata4  deletion (Figure 
1D and Supplemental Figures 3 and 4). At E9.5, Gata5  was also 
expressed in myocardium and was unaffected by Gata4  inactiva
-
tion (Supplemental Figure 3). Thus, Gata5  might have similarly 
mitigated the effect of Gata4  inactivation on target gene expres -
sion. In addition, Gata4  might regulate the regional expression 
of target genes; abnormalities of spatial distribution of a target 
gene might not be reflected in its overall expression level as mea -
sured by qRT-PCR. Indeed, while overall ANF  expression was not 
altered in G4NK embryos, ANF  was ectopically expressed in some 
of these hearts (Figure 7C). Altered expression of ANF  might 
reflect a defect in patterning of the RV and OFT of G4NK hearts.
One of the most studied Gata4  target genes is Nkx2-5 . Several 
GATA-dependent enhancers control the expression of Nkx2-5   
(35–37). However, we found that after Gata4  inactivation by  
Nkx2-5Cre, Nkx2-5  expression was downregulated by only 50% at 
E9.5, and this degree of downregulation was expected as a result 
of Nkx2-5  haploinsufficiency. Late Gata4  deletion resulted in a 
slight upregulation of Nkx2-5, similar to the Nkx2-5 upregulation 
we previously observed in embryos with a germline mutation that reduced Gata4  expression by 70% (22). Thus, our present data 
indicate that Nkx2-5  expression after E9.5 is not dependent upon 
Gata4. Recently, BMP induction of Nkx2-5 expression at the onset 
of cardiogenesis (E7.5 in mouse gestation) was shown to require 
Figure 7
Gata4  regulation of cardiac gene expression. ( A) Relative expression 
of transcription factors previously suggested to be Gata4 targets. RNA 
was isolated from embryo hearts at E9.5 (red bars, G4NK; black bars, 
Gata4flox/flox ;Nkx2-5WT/WT  controls) or at E12.5 (red bars, G4MC; black 
bars, Gata4flox/flox ;MHCαCre– controls). ( B) Relative expression of 
structural genes putatively identified as Gata4 targets, in E12.5 hearts 
(red bars, G4MC; black bars, Gata4flox/flox ;MHCαCre– controls). Gene 
expression was measured by qRT-PCR and normalized to 18S ribo -
somal RNA. * P < 0.05. ( C) Ectopic ANF expression in the OFT (blue 
arrow and shading), seen in 2 of 6 G4NK embryos examined at E9.5 by 
whole-mount in situ hybridization for ANF . Original magnification, ×32. 
(D) Model for the role of Gata4 and Nkx2-5 in the transcriptional regu -
lation of ventricular formation. Distinct transcriptional programs control 
the formation of the LV and RV. Gata4  regulates RV morphogenesis, 
in part through Hand2 , whereas Nkx2-5  regulates LV development 
in collaboration with Hand1 . In addition to the specific role of Gata4  
in RV formation, Gata4  regulates cardiomyocyte proliferation in both 
cardiac chambers via as-yet-unknown factors (X), which may be more dependent upon Gata4 in the RV than in the LV.
research article
1530  The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005Gata4  binding to a composite GATA/Smad enhancer, which sug -
gests that Gata4  may be important for the induction rather than 
the maintenance of Nkx2-5  expression (37). Alternatively, Gata5  
or Gata6  may functionally substitute for Gata4  to induce and/or 
maintain Nkx2-5 expression.
Gata4 regulation of cardiomyocyte proliferation . We have found that 
myocardial inactivation of Gata4  both early and late in heart devel -
opment (in G4NK and G4MC mouse embryos, respectively) resulted 
in decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation. Myocardial hypoplasia 
in Nkx2-5 knockout (43) and in Hand knockout mice (47) was not 
associated with altered cardiomyocyte proliferation or apoptosis, which suggests a defect in recruitment of cardiomyocyte precur
-
sors. Thus, the mechanism of myocardial hypoplasia due to Gata4  
inactivation is distinct and highlights the important role of Gata4  
in promoting the proliferation of cardiomyocytes.
In pulmonary artery smooth muscle, Gata4  was found to regu -
late cellular proliferation, possibly through regulation of cyclin 
D2 (30). In other systems, Gata factors both positively and nega -
tively regulate cellular proliferation in a manner that is dependent on the cellular environment. For instance, Gata1  inhibits prolif
-
eration and promotes terminal differentiation of erythroblasts (51), while it blocks interleukin-6–induced proliferation arrest 
in myeloid cells by sustaining cyclin D2  expression (52). Gene 
expression array analysis identified multiple cell-cycle regulators 
downstream of Gata1  that might mediate these effects (53). Using 
a focused candidate gene approach, we did not find significant 
downregulation of cyclin D1
–D3, Hop, or Bmp10  after myocardial 
Gata4  inactivation. Unbiased array-based approaches will need to 
be taken in order to identify genes downstream of Gata4  that reg -
ulate cardiomyocyte proliferation. Identification of these genes 
will be important for therapeutic strategies based upon expansion 
of cardiomyocyte populations.
Conclusion . Using Cre/loxP technology we have selectively inac -
tivated Gata4  within the myocardium at early and late stages of 
heart development. At both time points, we demonstrated that Gata4  was an essential regulator of cardiomyocyte prolifera
-
tion. Early in heart formation, myocardial inactivation of Gata4  
resulted in hypoplasia of the RV, which was associated with a 
downregulation of Hand2  expression and a decrease in cardio -
myocyte proliferation that was more severe in the RV than in the LV. These data have important implications for our understand
-
ing of the pathogenesis of congenital heart disease and for the development of therapeutic strategies that require modulation 
of cardiomyocyte proliferation.
Methods
Mice . Gata4flox/flox  mice were generated by gene targeting followed by Flp-
mediated removal of a Kan-Neo resistance cassette, as described previously 
(22). In these mice, exon 2, containing the start codon and 46% of the cod -
ing sequence, is deleted upon expression of Cre recombinase. Nkx2-5Cre, 
MHCαCre, and R26RstoplacZ alleles were described previously (23, 24, 28, 
43). To obtain G4NK and G4MC embryos, timed matings were set up between 
Gata4WT/flox , Cre-positive and Gata4flox/flox , Cre-null mice. Noon of the day 
of the plug was defined as E0.5. All procedures were carried out with the approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Boston Children’s Hospital.Histology and gene expression . Embryos were dehydrated through an etha
-
nol series and paraffin embedded. The Gata4  probe was constructed by 
PCR amplification of exon 2, the exon deleted by Cre-mediated recombina -
tion. The ANF  probe was a gift from C. Seidman (Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA) (54). The full-length TNC  probe was from an 
expressed sequence tag (dbEST ID 6838718). All other probes were developed as described previously (43). Section in situ hybridization was performed using 
35S-labeled probes as previously described (43). Darkfield signal was 
colored in red and superimposed on brightfield H&E- or DAPI-stained sec -
tions. Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed using digoxigenin-labeled probes following previously established protocols (55).
Whole-mount X-gal staining for 
β-galactosidase was performed as previ -
ously described (56). Immunofluorescent staining for Nfatc1 or Gata4 was performed using monoclonal antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.) and the ABC method (MOM kit; Vector Laboratories) with tyramide-Cy3 as the HRP substrate. Desmin counterstaining was performed using a Desmin rabbit antibody (BioMeda Corp.) and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen Corp.). Nuclei were stained with TOPRO3 (Invitrogen Corp.). Phosphohis
-
tone H3 was detected with a polyclonal antibody (Upstate) using the ABC method and tyramide-Cy3. BrdU labeling was achieved by injecting pregnant mice with 2 mg of BrdU intraperitoneally. After 2 hours, embryos were har
-
vested, and BrdU was detected with a monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) using the ABC method and tyramide-Cy3. Detection was facilitated by anti
-
gen retrieval with HCl and trypsin digestion per instructions of the manufac -
turer (Sigma-Aldrich). TUNEL staining was performed on paraffin sections using the TMR Red In Situ Death Detection kit (Roche Diagnostics).
qRT-PCR . Hearts from E9.5 ( G4
NK) and E12.5 ( G4MC) embryos were col -
lected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Hearts of each genotype (G4NK, n = 6; 
G4MC, n = 3) were pooled into a single sample, and RNA was prepared using 
the RNeasy kit with on-column DNase digestion (QIAGEN). Three sam -
ples were used per genotype. RNA integrity was verified and concentration determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer (model 2100; Agilent Technolo
-
gies). Real-time qRT-PCR was performed on an ABI 7700 Sequence Detec -
tor (Applied Biosystems) using Taqman probes ( Gata4 , Gata6 , Nkx2-5 , Carp , 
ANF , cyclin D1 , cyclin D2 , cyclin D3 , Hop, and  Bmp10 , all from GenScript; 
and 18S from Applied Biosystems). For primer and probe sequences, see 
Supplemental Table 1.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank M. Rivera for excellent technical support and M. Zeisberg for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was funded 
by grants from the NIH National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (1 
PO1 HL074734 and K08 HL004387-04). E.M. Zeisberg was funded by a Bayer fellowship grant from the German Society of Cardiology and by a grant from the Leopoldina Academy (BMBF-LPD 9901/8-105). 
Received for publication October 28, 2004, and accepted in revised 
form April 12, 2005.
Address correspondence to: William T. Pu, Department of Cardiol
-
ogy, Children’s Hospital Boston, Enders 13, 300 Longwood Ave -
nue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. Phone: (617) 919-2019; 
Fax: (617) 730-0140; E-mail: wpu@enders.tch.harvard.edu.
Seigo Izumo’s present address is: Novartis Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
 1. Hoffman, J.I. 1995. Incidence of congenital heart 
disease: I. Postnatal incidence. Pediatr. Cardiol.  
16:103–113.
 2. Waldo, K.L., et al. 2001. Conotruncal myocardium arises from a secondary heart field. Development.  
128:3179–3188.
 3. Mjaatvedt, C.H., et al. 2001. The outflow tract of 
the heart is recruited from a novel heart-forming field. Dev. Biol.  238:97–109.
 4. Kelly, R.G., Brown, N.A., and Buckingham, M.E. 
2001. The arterial pole of the mouse heart forms 
from Fgf10-expressing cells in pharyngeal meso -
research article
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation    http://www.jci.org   Volume 115   Number 6   June 2005 1531derm. Dev. Cell.  1:435–440.
 5. Runyan, R.B., and Markwald, R.R. 1983. Invasion of 
mesenchyme into three-dimensional collagen gels: 
a regional and temporal analysis of interaction in embryonic heart tissue. Dev. Biol.
 95:108–114.
 6. Srivastava, D., and Olson, E.N. 2000. A genet -
ic blueprint for cardiac development. Nature.  
407:221–226.
 7. Srivastava, D., Cserjesi, P., and Olson, E.N. 1995. 
A subclass of bHLH proteins required for cardiac morphogenesis. Science.
 270:1995–1999.
 8. Srivastava, D., et al. 1997. Regulation of cardiac 
mesodermal and neural crest development by the bHLH transcription factor, dHAND. Nat. Genet.
 
16:154–160.
 9. Benson, D.W., et al. 1999. Mutations in the car -
diac transcription factor NKX2.5 affect diverse 
cardiac developmental pathways. J. Clin. Invest.  
104:1567–1573.
 10. McElhinney, D.B., Geiger, E., Blinder, J., Benson, 
D.W., and Goldmuntz, E. 2003. NKX2.5 muta -
tions in patients with congenital heart disease.  
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.  42:1650–1655.
 11. Merscher, S., et al. 2001. TBX1 is responsible 
for cardiovascular defects in velo-cardio-facial/
DiGeorge syndrome. Cell. 104:619–629.
 12. Lindsay, E.A., et al. 2001. Tbx1 haploinsufficiency 
in the DiGeorge syndrome region causes aortic arch defects in mice. Nature.
 410:97–101.
 13. Basson, C.T., et al. 1997. Mutations in human 
TBX5 cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram syndrome. Nat. Genet.
 15:30–35.
 14. Garg, V., et al. 2003. GATA4 mutations cause 
human congenital heart defects and reveal an inter -
action with TBX5. Nature.  424:443–447.
 15. Okubo, A., et al. 2004. A novel GATA4 mutation 
completely segregated with atrial septal defect in a large Japanese family. J. Med. Genet.
 41:e97.
 16. Molkentin, J.D. 2000. The zinc finger-containing 
transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6. Ubiqui -
tously expressed regulators of tissue-specific gene 
expression. J. Biol. Chem.  275:38949–38952.
 17. Charron, F., and Nemer, M. 1999. GATA transcrip -
tion factors and cardiac development. Semin. Cell 
Dev. Biol.  10:85–91.
 18. Molkentin, J.D., Lin, Q., Duncan, S.A., and Olson, 
E.N. 1997. Requirement of the transcription factor 
GATA4 for heart tube formation and ventral mor -
phogenesis. Genes Dev.  11:1061–1072.
 19. Kuo, C.T., et al. 1997. GATA4 transcription factor is 
required for ventral morphogenesis and heart tube formation. Genes Dev.
 11:1048–1060.
 20. Narita, N., Bielinska, M., and Wilson, D.B. 1997. 
Wild-type endoderm abrogates the ventral develop -
mental defects associated with GATA-4 deficiency 
in the mouse. Dev. Biol.  189:270–274.
 21. Crispino, J.D., et al. 2001. Proper coronary vascular 
development and heart morphogenesis depend on 
interaction of GATA-4 with FOG cofactors. Genes 
Dev.  15:839–844.
 22. Pu, W.T., Ishiwata, T., Juraszek, A.L., Ma, Q., and 
Izumo, S. 2004. GATA4 is a dosage-sensitive regulator of cardiac morphogenesis. Dev. Biol.
 
275:235–244.
 23. Moses, K.A., DeMayo, F., Braun, R.M., Reecy, J.L., 
and Schwartz, R.J. 2001. Embryonic expression of an Nkx2-5/Cre gene using ROSA26 reporter mice. Genesis.
 31:176–180.
 24. Mao, X., Fujiwara, Y., and Orkin, S.H. 1999. 
Improved reporter strain for monitoring Cre recombinase-mediated DNA excisions in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
 96:5037–5042.
 25. Bruneau, B.G., et al. 1999. Chamber-specific cardiac 
expression of Tbx5 and heart defects in Holt-Oram syndrome. Dev. Biol.
 211:100–108.
 26. Imanaka-Yoshida, K., Matsumoto, K., Hara, M., 
Sakakura, T., and Yoshida, T. 2003. The dynamic expression of tenascin-C and tenascin-X during early heart development in the mouse. Differentia
-
tion. 71:291–298.
 27. Xu, H., et al. 2004. Tbx1 has a dual role in the mor -
phogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract. Develop -
ment.  131:3217–3227.
 28. Gaussin, V., et al. 2002. Endocardial cushion and 
myocardial defects after cardiac myocyte-specific conditional deletion of the bone morphogenetic protein receptor ALK3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
 
99:2878–2883.
 29. Sherr, C.J., and Roberts, J.M. 1999. CDK inhibitors: 
positive and negative regulators of G1-phase pro -
gression. Genes Dev.  13:1501–1512.
 30. Suzuki, Y.J., et al. 2003. Activation of GATA-4 by 
serotonin in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. J. Biol. Chem.
 278:17525–17531.
 31. Chen, H., et al. 2004. BMP10 is essential for main -
taining cardiac growth during murine cardiogen -
esis. Development.  131:2219–2231.
 32. Shin, C.H., et al. 2002. Modulation of cardiac 
growth and development by HOP, an unusual homeodomain protein. Cell.
 110:725–735.
 33. Dodou, E., Verzi, M.P., Anderson, J.P., Xu, S.M., and 
Black, B.L. 2004. Mef2c is a direct transcriptional target of ISL1 and GATA factors in the anterior heart field during mouse embryonic development. 
Development.
 131:3931–3942.
 34. Kuo, H., et al. 1999. Control of segmental expres -
sion of the cardiac-restricted ankyrin repeat pro -
tein gene by distinct regulatory pathways in murine  
cardiogenesis. Development.  126:4223–4234.
 35. Lien, C.L., et al. 1999. Control of early cardiac-spe -
cific transcription of Nkx2-5 by a GATA-dependent enhancer. Development.
 126:75–84.
 36. Searcy, R.D., Vincent, E.B., Liberatore, C.M., and 
Yutzey, K.E. 1998. A GATA-dependent nkx-2.5 
regulatory element activates early cardiac gene expression in transgenic mice. Development.
 
125:4461–4470.
 37. Brown, C.O., 3rd, et al. 2004. The cardiac determi -
nation factor, Nkx2-5, is activated by mutual cofac -
tors GATA-4 and Smad1/4 via a novel upstream 
enhancer. J. Biol. Chem.  279:10659–10669.
 38. Thompson, J.T., Rackley, M.S., and O’Brien, T.X. 
1998. Upregulation of the cardiac homeobox gene 
Nkx2-5 (CSX) in feline right ventricular pressure overload. Am. J. Physiol.
 274:H1569–H1573.
 39. Molkentin, J.D., Kalvakolanu, D.V., and Markham, 
B.E. 1994. Transcription factor GATA-4 regulates cardiac muscle-specific expression of the alpha-myo
-
sin heavy-chain gene. Mol. Cell. Biol.  14:4947–4957.
 40. Small, E.M., and Krieg, P.A. 2003. Transgenic analy -
sis of the atrialnatriuretic factor (ANF) promoter: 
Nkx2-5 and GATA-4 binding sites are required 
for atrial specific expression of ANF. Dev. Biol.  
261:116–131. 41. Houweling, A.C., Somi, S., Van Den Hoff, M.J., 
Moorman, A.F., and Christoffels, V.M. 2002. Devel -
opmental pattern of ANF gene expression reveals a 
strict localization of cardiac chamber formation in 
chicken. Anat. Rec.  266:93–102.
 42. Watt, A.J., Battle, M.A., Li, J., and Duncan, S.A. 
2004. GATA4 is essential for formation of the pro -
epicardium and regulates cardiogenesis. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  101:12573–12578.
 43. Tanaka, M., Chen, Z., Bartunkova, S., Yamasaki, N., 
and Izumo, S. 1999. The cardiac homeobox gene Csx/Nkx2.5 lies genetically upstream of multiple genes essential for heart development. Development.
 
126:1269–1280.
 44. Biben, C., et al. 2000. Cardiac septal and valvular 
dysmorphogenesis in mice heterozygous for muta -
tions in the homeobox gene Nkx2-5. Circ. Res.  
87:888–895.
 45. Tanaka, M., et al. 2002. A mouse model of con -
genital heart disease: cardiac arrhythmias and 
atrial septal defect caused by haploinsufficiency of 
the cardiac transcription factor Csx/Nkx2.5. Cold 
Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol.  67:317–325.
 46. McFadden, D.G., et al. 2000. A GATA-dependent 
right ventricular enhancer controls dHAND tran -
scription in the developing heart. Development.  
127:5331–5341.
 47. McFadden, D.G., et al. 2005. The Hand1 and 
Hand2 transcription factors regulate expansion of the embryonic cardiac ventricles in a gene dosage-
dependent manner. Development.
 132:189–201.
 48. Firulli, A.B., McFadden, D.G., Lin, Q., Srivastava, 
D., and Olson, E.N. 1998. Heart and extra-embry -
onic mesodermal defects in mouse embryos lack -
ing the bHLH transcription factor Hand1. Nat. 
Genet.  18:266–270.
 49. Riley, P., Anson-Cartwright, L., and Cross, J.C. 1998. 
The Hand1 bHLH transcription factor is essential 
for placentation and cardiac morphogenesis. Nat. 
Genet.  18:271–275.
 50. Yamagishi, H., et al. 2001. The combinatorial activi -
ties of Nkx2.5 and dHAND are essential for cardiac 
ventricle formation. Dev. Biol.  239:190–203.
 51. Weiss, M.J., Yu, C., and Orkin, S.H. 1997. Erythroid-
cell-specific properties of transcription factor 
GATA-1 revealed by phenotypic rescue of a gene-targeted cell line. Mol. Cell. Biol.
 17:1642–1651.
 52. Tanaka, H., et al. 2000. GATA-1 blocks IL-6-
induced macrophage differentiation and apoptosis through the sustained expression of cyclin D1 and bcl-2 in a murine myeloid cell line M1. Blood.
 
95:1264–1273.
 53. Rylski, M., et al. 2003. GATA-1-mediated prolifera -
tion arrest during erythroid maturation. Mol. Cell. 
Biol.  23:5031–5042.
 54. Zeller, R., Bloch, K.D., Williams, B.S., Arceci, R.J., 
and Seidman, C.E. 1987. Localized expression of the atrial natriuretic factor gene during cardiac embryogenesis. Genes Dev.
 1:693–698.
 55. Brent, A.E., Schweitzer, R., and Tabin, C.J. 2003. A 
somitic compartment of tendon progenitors. Cell.  
113:235–248.
 56. Kupershmidt, S., et al. 1999. Replacement by 
homologous recombination of the minK gene with lacZ reveals restriction of minK expression 
to the mouse cardiac conduction system. Circ. Res.
 
84:146–152.
