OOK 
No need to teach an old 
Normal Table of Xenopus Levis (Daudin) 
edited by P.D. Nieuwkoop andJ. Faber 
Garland Publishing, 1!?94. $55.00 pbk (252 pages) ISBN 0 8153 1896 0 
Nieuwkoop and Faber’s Normal Table Of 
Xenopm must be one of the most highly 
quoted works in vertebrate development 
literature. It was fust published in 19% at 
a time when relatively few laboratories 
used Xenopus as an experimental animal. 
The great success of the German school 
of embryologists, based on Spemann, 
Holtfreter and many others, was still very 
influential and amphibian embryologists 
still favoured the use of newts or 
salamanders (Tritums spp.) or frogs and 
toads (Rana and Bz.@). But at %at time, 
it was clear that the very poor availability 
of embryos from newts and frogs, limited 
to only a few months in the year, greatly 
restricted work. 
Three great advdntages of Xenopus as 
an experimental animal were beginning 
to become clear: (1) the availability of 
fertile eggs throughout the year, due to 
the ability of Xenopus to respond to 
commercial preparations of 
gonadotrophic hormone (whereas Rana 
spp. will produce eggs only after 
injection of pituitary extracts of other 
frogs, necessitating the sacrifice of many 
frogs to obtain a few eggs); (2) the ease 
of maintenance of Xenopus in the 
laboratory (it is relatively easy to feed and 
clean a permanently aquatic animal, 
rather than to have to use terraria of the 
kind needed for Rana spp. or newts> (3) 
the shorter life cycle of Xenopus (the one 
year required for Xenoptls is much better 
than three or four years required for 
Rana). At about that time, French 
embryologists, notably Gallien, had 
established Pleutieles as an acceptable 
laboratory animal. WhiIe still used today, 
newts of this genus have remained a 
speciality of a few laboratories, especially 
in France. For these reasons, the 
production of Nieuwkoop and Faber’s 
Nownal Table of Xenopw came at an 
ideal time, and did, without doubt, help 
to establish Xenopus as a popular 
laboratory organism. Now, nearly 40 
years later, it must be regarded as one of 
the few most favoured laboratory species 
for experimental embryology. 
With the advent of gene cloning, a 
large amount of embryologica work has 
involved the description of patterns of 
expression of new genes, the 
overexpression of genes by mRNA or 
IMA injection and the underexpression of 
genes, in XenopuS, by dominant-negative 
receptors or oIigo depletion through 
RNaseH activity. AII of these experimental 
interventions require a detaiIed how~edge 
of the mo@ology of early development. It is remarkable that the Normal Table of 
Xenopus, published so long ago, should 
still be the deftitive work in this field. It 
is not always appreciated that several 
workers contributed to this remarkable 
tour &force and these are clearly 
acknowledged on p. 6. 
The volume under review is an exact 
reproduction of the original work, page 
for page, from beginning to end. It 
contains one page of introduction by 
John Gerhart and Marc Kirschner. In 
effect, this is a reprint of the original 
book and is very welcome because it has 
been very hard, for a number of years, to 
obtain copies of this essential volume. 
My main comment is admiration at the 
quality of the original work, so much so 
that it is just as =Auable today as it was 
forty years ago. It is surprising that this 
volume is presented with a plastic 
paperclip to hold the pages together. 
Would it really have cost much more to 
have the book bound in a normal form? 
Many of us who work with 
Xenopus have regretted the absence from the original work of iIIustrations 
of histologic& sections showing the 
anatomy on which the excellent 
descriptions are based. Presumably 
these had to be omitted on the 
grounds of economy. There would be a 
very substantial demand for a collection 
of labelled diagrams of later 
embryo development. To some extent, 
this demand has been met by the recent 
book l%e Early Development of Xenopus 
laevis: an Atlas of the Histology by 
Hausen and Riebesell(1991, 
Springer-Verlag). However, this book, 
invaluable as it is, does not go beyond 
the tailbud stage. As more and more 
workers begin to analyse the details of 
later morphogenesis through gene 
activity, the demand for illustrations to 
accompany the Nieuwkoop and Faber 
Normal Table of Xenopus will increase. 
In the meantime, all those who work 
with Xenopus, and who may turn to it in 
the future, will greatly value the 
availability of this reprint of Nieuwkoop 
and Faber’s Nomzal Table of Xenopus. 
J.B. Gurdon 
Wellcome Trust and Cancer Research 
Campaign, Institute of Cancer and 
Developmental Biology, University of 
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, 
UK CB2 1QR. 
The Human Genome Project: Deciphering the Blueprint of Heredity 
edited by Necia Grant Cooper 
W.H. Freeman & Co., 1994. s27.95 hbk (362 pages) ISBN 0 935702 29 6 
As the above statement of John 
Whiteland suggests, one should 
consider lie to be a short unpleasant 
period between birth and death. One 
might conclude from his pessimistic 
statement that we are all predestined to 
live a troublesome life and we are not 
able to change this. Emile Zola might 
have agreed with him, but fortunately 
many others of the species Homo sapiens 
do not. Among those who don’t agree 
are certainly the researchers united 
in the Human Genome Project. The 
quality of life can be improved, as has 
been demonstrated for decades. 
Although modem medicine, mainly 
thanks to our knowledge of biological 
processes, does not necessarily improve 
the quality of life with every applied 
treatment to a disease, many diseases 
can be cured or the progress of a disease 
can be delayed, including diseases that 
are very frequent in our population, 
such as cancer or heart disease. For 
those who, unlike Whiteland, value 
TIG OCTOBER 1995 VOL. 11 No. 10 
418 their life, this is obviously a desirable 
development. 
The Human Genome Project is an 
internationally coordinated effort to 
determine the complete seqence of the 
nearly three billion base pairs that 
constitute the human genome, and the 
100000 or so genes that hide in this 
overwhelming amount of nucleotides 
that contain the genetic code of human 
life, as we know it. It is as such a unique 
project, often compared with another 
milestone in modem history, the Apollo 
mission that landed on the moon. Both 
projects have a lot in common. Once 
completed they are cetiirlly a ‘big step 
forward for mankind’. Both projects were 
also heavily criticized by people, often 
colleagues, who either felt that the 
project was too ambitious or too costly, 
and that the large amount of money 
spent could be used better for other 
science projects. 
The Human Genome Project, 
however, has already proven within the 
