 10.1101/gad.11.8.1061 Access the most recent version at doi: 1997 11: 1061-1072 Genes Dev.  J D Molkentin, Q Lin, S A Duncan, et al.   formation and ventral morphogenesis.Requirement of the transcription factor GATA4 for heart tube
  References
   http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/11/8/1061.full.html#ref-list-1This article cites 59 articles, 34 of which can be accessed free at:
ServiceEmail Alerting
 click here. top right corner of the article orReceive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
 http://genesdev.cshlp.org/subscriptionsgo to: Genes & Development To subscribe to 
Copyright © Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from  Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Requirement of the transcription factor 
GATA4 for heart tube formation and 
ventral morphogenesis 
Jeffery D. Molkentin, 1 Qing Lin, 1 Stephen A. Duncan, 2 and Eric N. Olson 1'3 
1Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 
75235-9148 USA; 2Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021 USA 
The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 has been implicated in heart development based on its early 
expression in precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm and its ability to activate the expression of a number of 
cardiac-specific genes. To determine the role of GATA4 in embryogenesis, we generated mice homozygous for 
a GATA4 null allele. Homozygous GATA4 null mice arrested in development between E7.0 and E9.5 because 
of severe developmental abnormalities. Mutant embryos most notably lacked a primitive heart tube and 
foregut and developed partially outside the yolk sac. In the mutants, the two bilaterally symmetric 
promyocardial primordia failed to migrate ventrally but instead remained lateral and generated two 
independent heart tubes that contained differentiated cardiomyocytes. We show that these deformities 
resulted from a general loss in lateral to ventral folding throughout the embryo. GATA4 is most highly 
expressed within the precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm at the posterior lip of the anterior intestinal portal, 
corresponding to the region of the embryo that undergoes ventral fusion. We propose that GATA4 is required 
for the migration or folding morphogenesis of the precardiogenic splanchnic mesodermal cells at the level of 
the AIP. 
[Kew Words: GATA4; cardiac morphogenesis; cardia bifida; anterior intestinal portal; foregut; transcription] 
Received February 25, 1997; revised version accepted March 18, 1997. 
The embryologic events associated with cardiac morpho- 
genesis have been studied for decades, but the underlying 
molecular mechanisms that control this process are 
poorly understood (Olson and Srivastava 1996). Early in 
development, uncommitted splanchnic mesoderm resid- 
ing on each lateral half of the developing embryo, at 
about the level of the future head fold, becomes specified 
to a cardiogenic fate by diffusible factors released from 
the underlying endoderm (for review, see Nascone and 
Mercola 1996). Once specified, the bilaterally symmetric 
cardiogenic precursors organize and migrate along the 
anterior intestinal portal (AIP), where they converge at 
the midline of the embryo to form the cardiac crescent. 
This cardiogenic crescent-shaped structure then folds 
ventrally resulting in fusion of the cardiac primordia at 
the midline and formation of the linear heart tube. The 
linear heart tube then undergoes looping morphogenesis 
such that the posterior-lying atrial region moves in an 
anterior and dorsal direction while the future right ven- 
tricular region rapidly distends rightward. The looped 
heart tube then undergoes septation, and the atrial and 
ventricular chambers become distinct. The basic helix- 
SCorresponding author. 
E-MAIL eolson@hamon.swmed.edu; FAX (214) 648-1196. loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors eHAND and 
dHAND (Srivastava et al. 1995) and the homeobox gene 
Nkx2.5 (Lyons et al. 1995) have been implicated in loop- 
ing morphogenesis of the heart. 
Six GATA proteins have been identified in vertebrate 
species, each of which contains a highly conserved 
DNA-binding domain consisting of two zinc fingers of 
the motif Cys-X~-Cys-X 17-Cys-X2-Cys (Felsenfeld 1989; 
Tsai et al. 1989; Yamamoto et al. 1990; Arceci et al. 
1993; Kelley et al. 1993; Laverriere et al. 1994; Morrisey 
et al. 1996, 1997). These two zinc fingers have been 
shown to direct binding to the DNA sequence element 
(A/T)GATA(A/G) (Ko and Engel 1993; Merika and Orkin 
1993), although just the carboxy-terminal finger is suffi- 
cient for site-specific interaction (Martin and Orkin 
1990; Yang and Evans 1992; Omichinski et al. 1993; Vis- 
vader et al. 1995). Examination of the DNA-binding site 
specificities of different GATA factors has demonstrated 
that all six members of the family bind the same con- 
sensus sequence, suggesting that they may substitute for 
one another in lineages in which they are coexpressed 
(Ko and Engel 1993; Merika and Orkin 1993; Morrisey et 
al. 1996, 1997). The artificial introduction of GATA4 
into GATA1 null embryonic stem (ES) cells has been 
shown to partially restore erythropoiesis (Blobel et al. 
1995) 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 11:1061-1072 © 1997 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/97 $5.00 1061 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
Based on their expression patterns, the GATA proteins 
have been divided into two subfamilies. GATA1/2/3 are 
expressed early in hematopoietic progenitors (Evans and 
Felsenfeld 1989; Tsai et al. 1989; Martin et al. 1990; Wil- 
son et al. 1990; Yamamoto et al. 1990; Lee et al. 1991; 
Zon et al. 1991; Dorfman et al. 1992), whereas GATA4/ 
5/6 are expressed in the mesodermal precursors that give 
rise to the heart as well as in the endoderm of the gut 
epithelium (Arceci et al. 1993; Kelley et al. 1993; Laver- 
riere et al. 1994; Morrisey et al. 1996, 1997). GATA4 is 
subsequently expressed in the myocardium throughout 
embryonic development and into adulthood (Arceci et al. 
1993; Laverriere et al. 1994). 
GATA1/2/3 have each been shown to be important 
regulators of hematopoietic-specific gene expression (for 
review, see Orkin 1992). GATA1, for example, was origi- 
nally identified as an activator of globin gene expression 
and was subsequently shown to be involved in the regu- 
lation of virtually every erythroid-specific gene exam- 
ined to date (for review, see Orkin 1992). Targeted dis- 
ruption of the GATA1, GATA2, and GATA3 genes in the 
mouse has demonstrated that each is an important regu- 
lator that establishes the identity of the hematopoietic 
lineage in which it is expressed (Penvy et al. 1991; Tsai et 
al. 1994; Pandolfi et al. 1995; Ting et al. 1996). Loss of 
GATA1 results in the absence of mature erythroid cells 
but not megakaryocytes or mast cells (Pevny et al. 1991; 
Blobel et al. 1995), whereas the loss of GATA2 results in 
a deficit in hematopoietic progenitor cells (Tsai et al. 
1994). Loss of GATA3 results in the complete absence of 
mature T cells as well as minor defects in liver hemato- 
poiesis (Pandolfi et al. 1995; Ting et al. 1996). 
GATA4 has been implicated in cardiac development 
based both on its early expression pattern and on its abil- 
ity to regulate a number of cardiac structural genes, 
such as s-myosin heavy chain (~-MHC), cardiac tropo- 
nin-C (cTNC), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), and brain 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) (Grepin et al. 1994; Ip et al. 
1994; Molkentin et al. 1994; Thuerauf et al. 1994). Stably 
transfected P19 embryonic carcinoma cells that express antisense GATA4 transcripts have also been shown to be 
deficient in their ability to differentiate into cardio- 
myocytes in the presence of DMSO (Grepin et al. 1995), 
and injection of GATA4, GATA5, or GATA6 RNA into 
Xenopus embryos is capable of prematurely activating 
expression of the R-cardiac actin and R-MHC genes (Jiang 
and Evans 1996). 
To investigate the function of GATA4 during embry- 
onic development, we generated mice deficient for this 
gene product by targeted disruption in ES cells. Although 
heterozygous mice were normal, homozygous null mice 
arrested in development between embryonic day 7.0 
(E7.0) and E9.5 because of severe morphogenic defects. 
GATA4 null embryos lacked a centralized heart tube and 
foregut, and developed partially outside the yolk sac. 
These defects resulted from a fundamental failure in lat- 
eral to ventral folding early in embryogenesis, suggesting 
that GATA4 is essential for the formation of the primi- 
tive heart tube, the AIP, and the foregut. 
Results 
Targeted disruption of GATA4 in ES cells and 
generation of null mice 
To mutate the GATA4 locus in ES cells, a replacement 
targeting vector was designed that would result in dele- 
tion of the exons encoding the two DNA-binding zinc 
finger domains and insertion of the neomycin resistance 
gene (neo) by homologous recombination. The thymi- 
dine kinase (TK) gene was included in the targeting vec- 
tor as a negative selection marker for nonhomologous 
recombination events (Fig. 1A). The targeting vector was 
electroporated into ES cells that were selected for the 
presence of the neo gene and the loss of the TK gene. 
Southern blot analysis identified four independent 
clones that had been properly targeted at the GATA4 
lOCUS. 
ES cells heterozygous for the targeted GATA4 allele 
were injected into E3.5 blastocysts derived from 
C57BL/6 mice, and blastocysts were subsequently im- 
A 
Sacl 
I 
GA TA 4 
Locus 
Targeting 
Vector EcoRV BamHI EcoRI BamHI Sacl 
Iii I 
s, p~o~ R 1=2 
X s.o, X 
Neo L TK ..= 
Sacl EcoRV BamHI EcoRV Sacl BsmHI Sacl 
I I , ' NeoL ~ i I~-L_ - - -- 
Targeted v LI Li i_.J 
Locus B 
5'probe c29 w.d 3'probe c29 W.d 
5 kb 3.5 kb 
EcoRV Sacl 
Figure 1. Partial map of the GATA4 genomic locus and genomic Southern strategy. (A) The GATA4 genomic locus surrounding the 
targeted area is shown. Homologous recombination resulted in the replacement of the two zinc finger-encoding exons with the neo 
resistance gene. The positions of the 5' and 3' Southern probes are shown, external to the targeting arms and internal to the restriction 
sites used to characterize the targeted locus. (B) A Southern blot was performed with genomic DNA that was generated from an ES cell 
clone (C29) used to generate chimeric mice. The results show that homologous recombination had occurred as predicted based on the 
additional EcoRV and SacI sites that were introduced with the neo cassette. 
1062 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
A planted into pseudopregnant Swiss foster mothers to ob- 
tain chimeric mice. Breeding of chimeras into a C57BL/6 
background resulted in transmission of the mutation 
through the germ line and generation of GATA4 hetero- 
zygous mice of the composite C57BL/6 x Sv129 geno- 
type. Heterozygotes for the GATA4 mutation were in- 
tercrossed to generate null mice and to determine the 
role of GATA4 in development. As a control, GATA4 
null embryos were analyzed for GATA4 mRNA expres- 
sion by RT-PCR and demonstrated that the replacement 
event resulted in a loss of mature GATA4 message (data 
not shown). 
Morphological phenotype of GATA4 -/- embryos and 
allelic distribution 
Although GATA4 heterozygous mice showed no dis- 
cernable phenotype, neonates born to GATA4 heterozy- 
gotes revealed no viable null animals, suggesting that the 
homozygous mutation resulted in embryonic lethality 
(data not shown). Analysis of a large group of embryos 
from heterozygote intercrosses taken at E8.5 and E9.5 
demonstrated that the allelic distribution was roughly 
Mendelian, at the predicted 1:2:1 ratio (Table 1). How- 
ever, no homozygous null embryos were found at E10.5, 
suggesting that they had been resorbed by that stage. 
At E9.5, GATA4 null embryos exhibited a number of 
severe defects including a general developmental delay 
and reduction in size, loss of a centralized heart, and 
protrusion of the head and tail from the posterior aspect 
of the yolk sac (Fig. 2A). A day earlier in development, 
the tail region of the embryo could already be seen de- 
veloping outside of the yolk sac (Fig. 2B). The majority of 
the GATA4 null embryos (65%) at E8.5 or E9.5 were of 
the phenotype shown in Figure 2; however, a fraction 
(35%) had arrested at a developmental stage that was 
morphologically equivalent to the egg cylinder normally 
seen at -E7.0 (Table 2). Of the GATA4 null embryos that 
developed beyond the egg cylinder stage, none contained 
a central heart tube or were positioned correctly within 
the yolk sac (Table 2). This analysis demonstrated that 
the GATA4 null phenotype had two varying degrees of 
severity, either developmental arrest at the egg cylinder 
stage, presumably before gastrulation, or progression 
past this stage to -E9.5. 
Histological analysis of GATA4 -/- embryos 
To further define the morphologic defects in GATA4 
null embryos, histologic sections of wild-type and mu- 
Table 1. Genotypes resulting from GATA4 
heterozygote intercrosses 
Allelic distribution 
Embryonic day +/+ +/- -/- 
8.5 14 (29%) 25 (51%) 10 (20%) 
9.5 33 (26%) 68 (54%) 25 (20%) 
Numbers of embryos of each genotype and their percentage of 
the total are shown for each day. +/- 4- 
Hd 
¥s GATA4 directs heart tube formation 
B 4- 
Figure 2. Gross morphologic appearance of GATA4 null em- 
bryos. (A) An E9.5 litter from a GATA4 heterozygote intercross 
was collected. The GATA4 mutant embryo on the right shows 
severe developmental abnormalities, including protrusion out- 
side the yolk sac and the lack of a primitive heart tube. The 
embryo on the left is heterozygous for the GATA4 mutation and 
is normal in appearance. The yolk sac has been removed from 
this embryo to show normal developmental landmarks at E9.5 
for comparison to the null embryo. (B) At E8.5, GATA4 null 
embryos were already protruding from their yolk sacs and 
showed severe developmental defects. The tail region can be 
seen as the embryo is in the process of turning while outside the 
yolk sac. (Hd) Head; (T) tail; (Ys) yolk sac. 
tant embryos within their decidua were compared (Fig. 3). 
Parasagittal sections of embryos taken at E7.5 showed that 
the mutants were already reduced in size and developmen- 
tally delayed by half a day compared to wild-type or het- 
erozygous littermates. Mutant embryos at E7.5 also 
showed a delay in closure of the proamniotic canal and 
incomplete cavitation of the exocoelomic cavity (Fig. 3B). 
However, null embryos contained both parietal and vis- 
ceral endoderm as well as an allantois. A day later, the 
structural defects were more obvious. Parasagittal sections 
of GATA4 null embryos within their deciduas showed that 
regions of the embryo were already developing outside the 
posterior aspect of the yolk sac (Fig. 3D, arrows). Normally 
by this time in development, each lateral half of the layer 
containing the splanchnic mesoderm and underlying endo- 
derm has folded ventrally to place the embryo within the 
yolk sac at the level of the heart and above. A parasagittal 
section of an E8.5 unaffected littermate shows that the 
head and heart region are already free within the yolk sac at 
this stage (Fig. 3C). 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 1063 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
Table 2. Prevalence of developmental defects in GATA4 null embryos 
Embryonic Arrested before Ouside of Lack of a Structurally 
day gastrulation yolk sac ~ central heart ~ unrecognizable a'b 
8.5 4/10 5/6 5/6 1/6 
9.5 8/25 15/17 15/17 2/17 
aRepresents the remaining embryos that progressed through gastrulation. 
bThese embryos were severely affected so that landmarks of development were not obvious but gastrulation had occurred based on 
marker analysis. 
Normally by E8.5, the lateral wings of splanchnic meso- 
derm with the underlying endoderm have migrated ven- 
trally at the level of the heart to generate the foregut and 
the centrally located primitive heart tube (Fig. 3E, G). How- 
ever, transverse sections demonstrated that the GATA4 
null embryos lacked any structures ventral to the noto- 
chord (Fig. 3F,H). In GATA4 null embryos, the lateral 
wings of endoderm and splanchnic mesoderm remained at 
the sides and were displaced dorsally as the midline of the 
embryo continued to grow. This resulted in the lack of foregut formation and the failure of the paired endocardial 
tubes to fuse at the ventral midline (Fig. 3F,H). Because the 
mutant embryos never folded ventrally, the yolk sac was 
not pulled over and in front of the embryo, but instead was 
pinched off dorsally, at the anterior and posterior ends of 
the embryo so that the head and tail came to lie outside the 
yolk sac (see Fig. 9 and Discussion, below). Also of note, 
the overlying ectoderm and somatic mesoderm never 
moved ventrally so that the amnion remained dorsal and 
did not surround the embryo (Fig. 3F,H). 
+/- 4- +/- 4- 
E7.5 ~ " ~" ~ E8.5 JL=~.~f~ ~ ", ':~ 
f ~ J .,.-'IW'. ~!~: ~~ i 
"f -" o 3 
E8.5 E8.5 ~~/ i0 r • ' r 
~. "~ ~ven ven 
Figure 3. Analysis of GALA4 null embryos by hematoxylin and eosin staining of decidua| sections. Parasagittal section through 
GATA4 heterozygote (A} and a GATA4 mutant embryo (B) at E7.5. Notice that the mutant embryo is delayed in development and is 
smaller than the heterozygous embryo. The proamniotic canal, indicated with an asterisk, has not yet closed and the ectoplacental 
cone region has not cavitated to the same extent in the mutant as in the heterozygous embryo. Parasagittal section through a 
heterozygous wild-type embryo (C) and a GATA4 mutant embryo (D) at E8.5 shows that regions of the mutant embryo are developing 
outside the yolk sac (large arrows) while the normal embryo is becoming surrounded by the yolk sac. A transverse section through an 
E8.5 heterozygous wild-type embryo (E) and a GATA4 mutant embryo (F) at the level of the developing heart shows that the normal 
embryo has already folded resulting in the placement of the foregut and heart ventral to the neural tube and notochord. The GATA4 
null embryo is unable to fold ventrally so that the foregut never forms and the heart-forming region remains lateral and dorsal to the 
neural tube and notochord. These relationships are shown more clearly in a diagram representing the transverse sections of the 
wild-type (G) and the mutant (H) embryos. The foregut endoderm is shown in blue, and the heart regions are shown in red. Notice how 
the most ventral developmental landmark in the GATA4 mutant embryo is the notochord while the wild-type embryo shows the 
foregut and heart region ventral to the notochord. (Am) Amnion; (E) ectoplacental cone; (A1) allantois; (Hf) head fold; (H) heart; (Ve) 
visceral endoderm; (Pe) parietal endoderm; (Ys) yolk sac; (Nt) neural tube; (Nc) notochord; (Fg) foregut; (Da) dorsal aorta. 
1064 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
GATA4 directs heart tube formation 
Analysis of GATA4 null embryos by whole-mount in 
situ hybridization 
It was of interest to analyze the expression of a number 
of cardiac markers, as GATA4 null embryos lacked a 
ventrally located heart tube but appeared to contain two 
independent heart tubes on either lateral edge. Whole- 
mount hybridization for the cardiac-expressed genes 
ANF, myosin light chain 1A (MLC1A), and ~-MHC dem- 
onstrated that GATA4 null embryos contained differen- 
tiated cardiomyocytes but that the heart-forming region 
was split on either side of the embryo, resulting in cardia 
bifida (Fig 4D-F). The cardiac-staining regions showed 
that the cardiogenic primordia remained bilateral in null 
embryos, whereas in wild-type embryos, they moved 
ventrally and fused at the midline to generate a single 
heart tube (Fig 4A-C). It is also of interest that the 
bilateral heart tubes in the mutant embryos some- 
times looped rightward (Fig. 4E) as normally occurs 
in the single heart tube of wild-type embryos (Fig. 4A). 
The cardiac marker genes MLC2A, MLC2V, Nkx2.5, 
eHAND, and dHAND appeared to be expressed by 
whole-mount in situ hybridization at roughly compa- 
rable levels between the mutant and wild-type hearts 
(data not shown). Despite expression of a number of dif- 
ferentiation markers, we never observed contractions in 
the bilateral heart tubes of the mutant embryos, suggest- 
ing that the individual cardiomyocytes had not function- 
ally differentiated. 
To investigate the relationship between the bilateral 
heart-forming regions and the dorsal-ventral axis of the 
embryo, cardiac-stained embryos were sectioned trans- 
versely. Sections of embryos stained for ANF clearly re- 
vealed the dorsolateral positions of the two heart-form- 
ing regions in the mutants (Fig. 5B). During normal de- 
velopment, committed splanchnic mesoderm with its 
associated underlying pharyngeal endoderm at the level of the heart moves ventrally and folds along the AIP. 
This lateral to ventral folding encloses the endoderm 
within the foregut and fuses the two promyocardial re- 
gions in front of the neural tube and foregut (Fig. 5A). 
However, in GATA4 null embryos, the endoderm and 
the overlying splanchnic mesoderm were unable to 
move ventrally, resulting in the formation of two inde- 
pendent heart-forming regions on either side of the em- 
bryo and the lack of an enclosed foregut (Fig. 5B). Inspec- 
tion of the cardiomyocytes from GATA4 null embryos 
suggested that they had undergone the characteristic 
mesenchymal to epithelial transition, despite a lack of 
ventral midline positioning. Endocardial cells could also 
be visualized in the split cardiac tubes of the GATA4 
null embryo, suggesting that there was not a defect in 
the specification of this lineage (Fig. 5B; data not shown). 
Also of note, the underlying pharyngeal endoderm layer 
appeared to aggregate and form pouches, suggesting that 
it continued to grow in place without folding out ven- 
trally (Fig. 5B). 
The morphological defects in GATA4 null embryos 
were specific to the heart-forming region, as many other 
major developmental events occurred normally. Null 
embryos at E8.5 consistently contained between four 
and eight somites as visualized by hybridization for 
Moxl RNA (Candia et al. 1992) (Fig. 6D). The presence of 
this number of somites suggested that null embryos 
could develop to a stage equivalent to E8.5, despite the 
lack of a centralized heart tube or the proper association 
of the embryo with the yolk sac. RNA for the forkhead 
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 3~ 
(HNF3~) was also present in null embryos, suggesting 
that they developed a relatively normal notochord and 
neural tube throughout the axis of the embryo (Ang et al. 
1993; Sasaki and Hogan 1993) (Fig 6E). Interestingly, 
analysis of this marker demonstrated the loss of the AIP 
and all other ventral structures in GATA4 null embryos. 
ANF MLC1A MHC 
+/- 
-/- 
E8.5 E9.5 E9.5 Figure 4. Whole-mount in situ hybridization 
analysis of cardiac markers. (A) ANF was ex- 
pressed in an E8.5 heterozygous embryo as ex- 
pected in the primitive heart tube in its proper 
ventral position. (D) A dorsal view of an E8.5 
GATA4 mutant embryo also demonstrates 
abundant expression of ANF; however, the 
heart-forming region is split and is positioned 
laterally and dorsally. Expression of MLC1A 
was also analyzed in an E9.5 heterozygous em- 
bryo (B), shown in side view, and a mutant 
littermate (E) shown in dorsal view. (C)Analy- 
sis of ~-MHC (MHC) mRNA expression dem- 
onstrated high levels in both the heterozygous 
embryo and in the GATA4 null embryo (F}. 
Part of the yolk sac was left attached to this 
mutant embryo so its association within the 
edges of the yolk sac could be visualized. (Hd) 
Head; (H)heart; (Ys)yolk sac. 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 1065 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
A Dorsal 
+/- 
Ventral 
B Dorsal 
'~:~ ;Am 
:~.~. ~.-':~; ... 
........ • '~~!, ' ~3 .... ~ 
- En SpY 
Ventral 
Figure 5. Transverse sections through ANF-stained embryos at 
the level of the heart. Sections of an E8.5 heterozygous embryo 
(A) show that the primitive heart tube has formed correctly, 
ventral to the embryo, whereas the heart-forming region in the 
GATA4 null embryo (B) has not moved ventrally. The heart- 
forming region in the mutant remains lateral and differentiates 
into two independent heart tubes. Because the mutant embryo 
has not folded ventrally it also lacks a foregut. Notice that the 
amnion remains dorsal and has not moved ventrally to position 
itself around the mutant embryo. (Am) Amnion; (Nf) neural 
fold; (H) heart; (Nt) neural tube; (En) endoderm; (Sp) splanchnic 
mesoderm; (Ec) ectoderm; and (Fg) foregut. 
A ventral view of a wild-type embryo at E8.5 shows the 
AIP clearly, whereas in the mutant embryo, HNF313 
staining is visible along the entire length of the embryo 
because it is not obscured by the AIP (Fig. 6B,E). When 
these HNF3~3-stained mutant embryos were sectioned 
transversely, expression could also be demonstrated in 
the underlying endoderm, suggesting that endoderm was 
not compromised by the null mutation (data not shown). 
The homeodomain transcription factor OTX2 is nor- 
mally expressed in both the neuroectoderm and head 
mesenchyme within the forebrain and diencephalon (Fig. 
6C) (Simeone et al. 1993). In GATA4 null embryos, 
OTX2 was expressed in the correct pattern within the 
developing head (Fig. 6F); however, the head folds of the 
GATA4 null embryos were slightly delayed in their de- 
velopment and were not fused. It is likely that this delay 
in head fold fusion is a secondary effect attributable to 
the development outside the yolk sac. Markers for lateral 
mesoderm such as the homeobox gene Lim l and the bHLH genes eHAND and dHAND were also examined 
and demonstrated that lateral mesoderm was specified 
and positioned correctly in GATA4 null embryos (Barnes 
et al. 1994; Srivastava et al. 1995; data not shown). 
GATA4 expression at the level of the anterior 
intestinal portal 
Our analysis of GATA4 null embryos demonstrated an 
essential role for GATA4 in ventral morphogenesis. 
However, based on previous studies it was unclear how 
this defect correlated with the endogenous pattern of 
GATA4 expression. Prior to E7.5, GATA4 was reported 
to be expressed in the visceral endoderm, the allantois, 
and the anterior aspect of the embryo that is thought to 
be the precardiac splanchnic mesoderm (Heikinheimo et 
al. 1994; Laverriere et al. 1994; Morrisey et al. 1996). At 
E8.5, GATA4 continues to be expressed in the visceral 
endoderm, which has fused with extraembryonic meso- 
derm to form the yolk sac, in the allantois, and in the 
heart and underlying septum transversum (Heikinheimo 
et al. 1994; Morrisey et al. 1996). 
In GATA4 null embryos, the first signs of morpho- 
genic abnormality occur at -E8.0 when ventral folding is 
occurring and the AIP is prominent. We examined more 
carefully the normal expression pattern of GATA4 dur- 
ing this critical time point of ventral closure and found 
that GATA4 mRNA was highly localized to the poste- 
rior aspect of the AIP, whereas it was expressed more 
weakly in the fusing heart tubes just anterior to the AIP 
(Fig. 7). Sectioning of this embryo demonstrated that ex- 
pression was restricted to the splanchnic mesodermal 
cell layer (data not shown). Thus, GATA4 was expressed 
most intensely within the region of the AIP that was 
actively migrating and folding in a ventral-medial direc- 
tion. Together, these results suggest that GATA4 partly 
directs the process of lateral to ventral folding at the 
level of the AIP. 
Pregastrulation arrest in a small percentage of GATA4 
null embryos 
Approximately 40% of the E8.5 embryos and 30% of the 
E9.5 embryos appeared to be severely delayed or arrested 
at the egg cylinder stage (Table 2). We examined this 
affected population further by whole-mount in situ 
analysis of E7.0-E7.5 litters for markers of gastrulation 
and consistently observed a population of null embryos 
that failed to express Brachyury, goosecoid, or Flkl (data 
not shown). Because GATA4 is expressed in visceral en- 
doderm and a defect in visceral endoderm was also ob- 
served in HNF4 null embryos which arrested at a similar 
stage (Chen et al. 1994), we also investigated a possible 
defect in this cell population using the visceral endo- 
derm marker c~-fetoprotein. Mutant embryos in this 
class, taken at any time point between E7.0 and E9.5, 
lacked expression of c~-fetoprotein as detected by whole- 
mount in situ hybridization (data not shown). 
GATA4 null embryos that had morphologically pro- 
gressed past the egg cylinder stage showed expression of 
1066 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
GATA4 directs heart tube formation 
+/- 
-/- Moxl HNF3B OTX2 
F Hd 
E8.5 E8.5 E9.5 Figure 6. Whole-mount in situ hybridization 
analysis for normal developmental landmarks. 
Analysis of Moxl mRNA expression in an E8.5 
embryo (A) revealed approximately the same 
number of somites in wild-type and mutant em- 
bryos (D), shown in dorsal view. Although the 
mutant embryos generate somites, they are not 
organized as tightly as the somites from normal 
embryos. Ventral views of E8.5 wild-type (B) 
and mutant (E) embryos hybridized for HNF3~ 
mRNA showed expression in the notochord and 
neural tube floor plate. Notice how the AIP is 
visible in the normal embryo while a ventrally 
located AIP structure is not present in the 
GATA4 null. A lateral view of an E9.5 hetero- 
zygous wild-type embryo (C) hybridized for 
OTX2 mRNA showed expression in the fore- 
brain and diencephalon. Mutant embryos (F) 
also generate a discernible head structure that 
showed expression of OTX2, although the head 
region is slightly delayed in development and 
has not fused completely. A portion of yolk sac 
was left on this mutant embryo (F) while the 
yolk sacs were completely removed from the 
rest of the embryos in this panel. (Ys) yolk sac; 
(Hd) head; (Nt) neural tube; (Sm) Somites; (AIP) 
anterior intestinal portal. 
~-fetoprotein by both whole-mount hybridization and 
RT-PCR as well as expression of the visceral endoderm 
markers HNF4 and apolipoprotein E (ApoE) by RT-PCR 
(data not shown). These data suggest that a percentage of 
GATA4 null embryos are rescued by a compensatory 
mechanism, possibly by functionally similar molecules. 
Candidate factors that might compensate for the loss of 
GATA4 are GATA5 and GATA6. Expression levels of 
GATA5 and GATA6 were tested by semiquantitative 
RT-PCR and demonstrated that GATA5 mRNA re- 
Figure 7. Whole-mount in situ hybridization for GATA4 ex- 
pression in a wild-type embryo. Expression of GATA4 mRNA is 
shown at the critical developmental time point (E8.0) when the 
AIP is actively folding and the centrally located heart tube is 
forming. GATA4 is expressed most intensely at the posterior lip 
of the AIP, the region undergoing active ventral morphogenesis. 
(H) Heart; (Hf) head fold; (AIP) anterior intestinal portal. mained constant between wild-type and mutant em- 
bryos, as did the ribosomal control marker L7, whereas 
the GATA6 message was up-regulated two- to threefold 
in mutant embryos (Fig. 8). These data suggest that 
GATA6 can compensate for the loss of GATA4 and par- 
tially rescue aspects of development. 
Discussion 
The phenotype of the GATA4 null embryo reveals a 
critical role for GATA4 in early morphogenetic move- 
ments of the mouse embryo. GATA4 is essential for the 
formation of the linear cardiac tube and the AIP, as well 
as for yolk sac development. Despite previous studies 
that have suggested an essential role for GATA4 in con- 
trolling cardiac gene expression, myocyte differentia- 
tion, and visceral endoderm specification, our results 
show that GATA4 is not required for these processes. 
Role of GATA4 in ventral morphogenesis of the 
embryo 
In GATA4 mutant embryos, the loss of a ventral heart 
tube and development outside the yolk sac are the result 
of a failure in lateral to ventral folding. At E7.5, the em- 
bryo is in late gastrulation and the region just caudal to 
the buccopharyngeal membrane (prochordal plate) thick- 
ens to form the AIP (DeRuiter et al. 1992), which con- 
sists of splanchnic mesoderm and its underlying endo- 
derm (Fig. 9). At the midline of the AIP, a thickening is 
observed in which the underlying endoderm splits either 
half of the precardiac splanchnic mesoderm. As develop- 
ment progresses, the bilateral precardiac splanchnic me- 
soderm with the underlying endoderm fold inward at 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 1067 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
L7 GATA5 GATA6 
+/+ -/- +/+ -/- +/+ -/- 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Figure 8. RT-PCR analysis of GATA5 and GATA6 mRNA lev- 
els in GATA4 null embryos. Wild-type and GATA4 null em- 
bryos were collected at E8.5, and total RNA was extracted and 
reverse transcribed. The rRNA product L7 was used as a control 
for quantitation between these two groups (lanes 1,2). The re- 
sults show identical levels of GATA5 mRNA (lanes 3,4) be- 
tween wild-type and GATA4 null embryos while GATA6 
mRNA levels (lanes 5,6) were up-regulated in the mutant em- 
bryos. 
this thickening and converge at the midline of the em- 
bryo (Stalsberg and DeHaan 1968; DeRuiter et al. 1992). 
As this process continues, the two lateral precardiac re- 
gions fuse along their lengths and entrap the underlying 
endoderm, generating the foregut (Fig. 9B). This lateral to 
ventral fusion progresses in an anterior to posterior di- 
rection to "zipper" the embryo together and results in 
fusion of the lateral edges of yolk sac endoderm in front 
of the embryo so that the area of the embryo anterior to 
the AIP becomes free within the yolk sac (Fig. 9C,D). 
In GATA4 null embryos, the AIP does not form and as 
a result, the bilateral cardiac primordia remain lateral 
and attached at their edges to the yolk sac (Fig. 9E). De- 
spite this failure in ventral morphogenesis, the bilateral 
precardiac splanchnic mesoderm continues to develop 
and differentiates into two independent heart tubes. As 
the center of the mutant embryo continues to grow, it 
displaces the lateral halves of yolk sac endoderm dorsal 
to the embryo proper (Fig. 9F). As this region of endo- 
derm comes together behind the embryo, it pinches off 
dorsally, resulting in the progressive anterior to posterior 
zippering of the embryo outside the yolk sac (Fig. 9G,H). 
Descriptions of other vertebrate mutants support the 
conclusion that a fundamental loss in ventral folding is 
linked to cardia bifida and improper yolk sac develop- 
ment. A naturally occurring mouse mutation called 
kinky has been described that results in duplication or 
twinning of the embryonic axis (Glueksohn-Schoenhei- 
mer 1949). As a result of the lateral axis duplication, 
kinky embryos develop outside the yolk sac and lack a 
central heart. This mutation likely blocks the ability of 
these embryos to fold ventrally along their lengths, given 
that the heart-forming regions and AIP are obscured be- 
tween the two different axes. Recently, two zebrafish 
mutations named miles apart and bonnie and clyde 
were reported to result in cardia bifida resembling that of 
GATA4 mutant mice (Chen et al. 1996; Stainier et al. 
1996). It is interesting to speculate that the genes respon- 
sible for these mutant phenotypes may act in the same 
morphogenetic pathway as GATA4. 
Very little is known about the process that establishes 
the AIP and the ensuing lateral to ventral folding that 
generates the foregut and places the heart at the midline. 
DeHaan (1963) concluded that the active process result- 
ing in lateral to ventral folding at the level of the AIP likely occurs as a result of the mobility of clusters of 
precardiac cells. However, more recent evidence sug- 
gests that the underlying endoderm may also participate 
in this process (Suzuki et al. 1995). Thus, it is likely that 
the process of lateral to ventral folding occurs as a result 
of an interplay between the overlying splanchnic meso- 
derm and the underlying endoderm, possibly because of 
differential growth between these two layers and the em- 
bryo proper. GATA4 is expressed in precardiac splanch- 
nic mesoderm at a time when the active processes of 
heart tube formation and foregut closure are occurring. 
E7.5 
E8.0 
E7.5 Wildtype Mutant 
A E 
Neural Fold Neural Fold • . ~Amnlon ~ , , 
olk Sac 
Promyocardlum~ __ I - ~r~l°d e~..~ ~=~" pr i:ndoderm E7.5 
B Neural Fold _ Primitive 
[ ~ ~ Heart 
kmnion /~_ jTubes ~"~ 
Ik Sac E8.5 
,mn, Neura, 
~1 ~ Promyocardlum ~=,,=m=,~===~_.. Tube Foragut ~-noooerm 
E8.5 
E8.5 E9.5 
Figure 9. Schematic representation of the processes of ventral 
morphogenesis and heart tube formation in a wild-type and 
GATA4 mutant embryo. (A)At E7.5 the precardiogenic splanch- 
nic mesoderm precursors and the associated underlying endo- 
derm begin to migrate ventrally. By E8.0 these cardiogenic cells 
migrate ventrally to the midline (B) and fuse to generate the 
primitive heart tube and foregut lined with endoderm. The yolk 
sac, which is contiguous with the underlying endoderm, is 
pulled from its lateral position (C) early in development, to a 
ventral position (D) so that the edges of the yolk sac meet and 
pinch off to release the embryo anterior to this fusion. In mu- 
tant embryos, at E7.5, the precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm 
precursors fail to involute or migrate (E) so that by E8.5, they 
become displaced laterally and dorsally (F). This dorsal displace- 
ment results in the fusion of the yolk sac edges behind the 
GATA4 mutant embryo resulting in the progressive release 
(G,H) of the head and tail outside the yolk sac. 
1068 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
GATA4 directs heart tube formation 
GATA4 expression is strongest at the posterior edge of 
the AIP, which is the region that actively converges ven- 
trally. Given the phenotype of the GATA4 null embryo, 
it is likely that GATA4, in part, directs this active pro- 
cess of lateral to ventral folding. 
How might GATA4 control the process of lateral to 
ventral folding? One possibility is that GATA4 regulates 
the migration of cardiogenic splanchnic mesodermal pre- 
cursors along the endodermal cell layer. Alternatively, 
GATA4 might be required for differential proliferation of 
splanchnic mesodermal precursors versus the underlying 
endoderm to promote folding. 
For a number of reasons, we believe it is unlikely that 
disruption of the GATA4 gene affects the underlying en- 
doderm. First, sections of GATA4 null embryos demon- 
strated that the underlying pharyngeal endoderm contin- 
ues to grow so that this layer appeared convoluted and 
expresses HNF3~ (Figs. 5B and 6E), suggesting that there 
is not a defect in the proliferative ability of this cell layer 
or its ability to express markers of differentiation. Sec- 
ond, many studies have demonstrated that anterior en- 
doderm is required for the commitment of unspecified 
splanchnic mesoderm to the cardiac lineage (for review, 
see Nascone and Mercola 1996). Given that the GATA4 
null embryo contains specified and differentiated cardio- 
myocytes, it is likely that the underlying endoderm is 
not defective in its ability to communicate with the 
splanchnic mesoderm. Third, the endoderm in the 
GATA4 null embryo is competent in its ability to fuse 
and pinch off at the midline, although it occurs dorsally. 
Thus, it is likely that the molecular defect in the GATA4 
null embryo is not intrinsic to the endodermal cell layer, 
but is likely intrinsic to the cardiogenic splanchnic me- 
sodermal cells. Together, these data suggest a model of 
development in which lateral to ventral folding and AIP 
formation are directed, in part, by the precardiogenic 
splanchnic mesodermal precursors. 
The role of GATA4 in controlling cardiac lineage 
commitment and differentiation 
GATA4 was first implicated in controlling the cardiac 
gene program based on its ability to direct the expression 
of four cardiac structural genes, ~-MHC, cTNC, ANF, 
and BNP (Grepin et al. 1994; Ip et al. 1994; Molkentin 
et al. 1994; Thuerauf et al. 1994). Furthermore, a recent 
study reported that P19 embryonic carcinoma cells sta- 
bly expressing antisense GATA4 transcript were unable 
to differentiate into cardiomyocytes in response to 
DMSO (Grepin et al. 1995). Our analysis demonstrates 
that GATA4 null mice have differentiated cardiac tissue 
and that a number of structural genes previously thought 
to be GATA4 dependent are expressed normally in mu- 
tant embryos. A likely explanation for these differences 
is that GATA6, which is expressed early in the develop- 
ing heart, can compensate for some GATA4 functions in 
cardiomyocytes during embryogenesis. Consistent with 
this notion, GATA4 and GATA6 are highly conserved 
within their DNA-binding domains and recognize a 
GATA consensus element equally (Morrisey et al. 1996, 1997) and GATA6 mRNA is up-regulated in E8.5 mutant 
embryos (Fig. 8). Furthermore, a recent study reported 
that GATA6 overexpression in Xenopus embryos was 
capable of delaying cardiomyocyte differentiation result- 
ing in enlarged heart-forming regions, suggesting that 
GATA6 plays an important role in controlling cardio- 
myocyte differentiation (Gove et al. 1997). 
A greater understanding of the role of GATA4 in car- 
diac development may require analysis in the back- 
ground of GATA5- or GATA6-targeted disruptions. Loss- 
of-function analysis in the mouse has, in many cases, 
demonstrated that members of a highly related gene fam- 
ily can compensate for one another's function if they are 
coexpressed within the same lineage during develop- 
ment. The disruption of the GATA4 gene in the mouse 
demonstrates that it has an autonomous function in di- 
recting lateral to ventral folding and cardiac tube mor- 
phogenesis, yet its role in controlling the identity or dif- 
ferentiation of cardiac myocytes may only be revealed by 
combinatorial disruption with GATA5 or GATA6. Con- 
sistent with this notion is the fact that targeted disrup- 
tion of the GATA5 gene in the mouse does not result in 
embryonic lethality, suggesting that its functions may 
overlap with that of GATA4 and GATA6 in cardiomyo- 
cyte development (J. Molkentin and E. Olson, unpubl.). 
Loss of gastrulation in a percentage of GATA4 mutant 
embryos 
Approximately one-third of the GATA4 null embryos 
arrested at the egg cylinder stage and failed to gastrulate. 
Compromised function of either parietal or visceral en- 
doderm can result in arrested development at this stage 
(for review, see Copp 1995; see also Chen et al. 1994; 
Healy et al. 1995; Duncan et al. 1997). Visceral and pa- 
rietal endoderm arise from primitive endoderm by -E4.5 
in the mouse (Gardner 1983; Duncan et al. 1994). Vis- 
ceral endoderm forms a layer of columnar-shaped cells 
that surrounds the entire embryo where it secretes im- 
portant nutrients and filters substances between the ma- 
ternal and embryonic compartments. GATA4 is ex- 
pressed in visceral endoderm, suggesting that it may be 
required for the proper development of this cell layer. 
Recently, GATA4 null ES cells were shown to be defi- 
cient in their ability to differentiate in culture into vis- 
ceral endoderm, suggesting that GATA4 is necessary for 
the differentiation of this cell lineage (Soudais et al. 
1995). Although all GATA4 mutant embryos contained a 
layer of morphologically distinct visceral endoderm 
cells, it is likely that the function of this cell layer is 
compromised to a variable extent. 
The finding that approximately two-thirds of the 
GATA4 null embryos progressed through gastrulation 
suggests that there is a critical point in development in 
which visceral endoderm function can be rescued. Obvi- 
ous candidates for the factors that might compensate for 
the loss of GATA4 are GATA5 and GATA6. Analysis of 
GATA5 and GATA6 mRNA levels demonstrated that 
GATA6 is up-regulated two- to threefold in GATA4 null 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 1069 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
embryos, suggesting that compensation may result in 
partial developmental rescue (Fig. 8). 
Together, these analyses demonstrate that GATA4 
plays a critical role in at least two developmental pro- 
grams within the embryo. GATA4 is likely required for 
the proper function of the visceral endoderm and is in- 
dispensable for establishing a morphogenic cue that re- 
sults in lateral to medial folding of the embryo at the 
level of the AIP and the subsequent generation of the 
centrally located primitive heart tube and foregut. Our 
analysis of the GATA4 mutant phenotype suggests that 
the process of heart formation is linked to the ability of 
the embryo to fold ventrolaterally, and it suggests that 
precardiac mesodermal cells actively direct AIP forma- 
tion. 
Materials and methods 
GATA4 targeting strategy 
To construct the GATA4 targeting vector, a genomic clone was 
isolated from an Sv129 ~ genomic library and mapped against a 
panel of restriction enzymes. Because the two exons encoding 
the zinc finger domain are located -900 bp apart and are indis- 
pensable for GATA4 function, they were chosen for replace- 
ment. On the 3' end of the GATA4 genomic locus, a PCR primer 
was designed -500 bp inside of the 3' SacI site and another was 
designed just inside the carboxy-terminal zinc finger exon to 
generate the 2.0-kb short arm by PCR with a high-fidelity poly- 
merase composite called Expand Long Template (Boeringer 
Mannheim). The short arm primers contained XhoI linkers and 
were of the sequence 3'-GAGCCGCGCTCGAGGGAGGGTC- 
TCACCAGCAG, and 5'-CTGGGCGCCTCGAGTGGATGCC- 
CTGCCCTGCT. The long arm was generated by PCR of a 4.0- 
kb fragment that was just inside of the intron 5' to the amino- 
terminal zinc finger exon and -500 bp 3' of the EcoRV site. The 
long arm primers contained ClaI linkers and were of the se- 
quence 5'-GACTCCAGGCCATCGATCGTAGCTGGGGCA- 
CCCAT, and 3'-CGACCGAGTCCATCGATGTCTCCCGGG- 
AGACTGAT. The long and short arms were then cloned into 
the ClaI and XhoI sites of the vector pTK-NEO (Fig. 1). 
ES cell transfection and chimera production 
Methods for electroporation of AB2.2 ES cells with the linear- 
ized targeting vector, growth of ES cells on STO feeder fibro- 
blasts for G418, and FIAU resistance were described previously 
(Ramirez-Solis et al. 1993). Cell cloning and isolation of geno- 
mic DNA for Southern analysis was performed as described 
previously (Ramirez-Solis et al. 1993). Four targeted clones were 
obtained from a total of 400, and one of these clones, called C29, 
was injected into the blastocysts of C57BL/6 mice, which were 
subsequently implanted into pseudopregnant Swiss foster fe- 
male mice. 
Southern blot and PCR analysis of targeting 
ES cell genomic DNA, as well as tail genomic D1NA, was ana- 
lyzed for the correct targeting event by Southern blot analysis 
with probes made against sequences outside the targeting vector 
on both the 5' and 3' ends of the GATA4 locus (Fig. 1A). Geno- 
mic DNA was prepared as described previously (Matzuk et al. 
1992). The 5' probe was generated from a region just 3' of the 
EcoRV site (Fig. 1A) by PCR of a 320-bp product. Use of this probe on EcoRV-digested genomic DNA resulted in the identi- 
fication of an 18-1<b band on a Southern blot, whereas targeted 
genomic DNA containing the neo gene resulted in the identifi- 
cation of a 5.0-kb band (Fig. 1B). The 3' Southern probe was 
generated from a region 5' to the 3' SacI site by PCR of a 360-bp 
product. This probe identified an 11.0-kb wild-type band and a 
3.5-kb targeted band following SacI digestion (Fig. 1B). For PCR 
genotyping, -50 ng of genomic tail or yolk sac DNA was used. 
For substantially smaller embryos lacking a yolk sac, the entire 
embryo was lysed in Taq PCR buffer containing 0.1% Triton 
X-100 and treated with 0.5 mg/ml of proteinase K for 1 hr at 
55°C in a volume of 20 ~al. This reaction was heat inactivated at 
100°C for 5 min, and half was used directly in a PCR reaction 
with Taq DNA polymerase. The primer pair for the wild-type 
locus was 5'-ACTCTGGAGGCGAGATGGG, and 3'-CTCG- 
GCATTACGACGCCACAG, which generated a 900-bp band. 
The primer pair for the targeted locus was 5'-GCCCTGA- 
ATGAACTGCAGG, and 3'-CACGGGTAGCCAACGCTAT, 
which generated a 500-bp band. Reaction conditions were as 
follows: denaturation for 20 sec at 96°C, primer annealing for 25 
sec at 62°C, and extension for 60 sec at 72°C for a total of 30 
cycles with one unit of Taq DNA polymerase in a volume of 50 
~1 containing 200 ~m dNTPs and 50 pmoles of each primer in 
Taq PCR buffer (Perkin Elmer Cetus). 
Whole-mount in situ analysis 
To detect endogenous RNA by whole-mount in situ analysis, a 
number of specific riboprobes were generated. To visualize the 
developing somites, notochord and neural tube floor plate, and 
the developing head region, plasmids containing cDNA inserts 
for Moxl, HNF3~, and OTX2 were used, respectively (Candia et 
al. 1992; Ruiz i Altaba et al. 1993; Simeone et al. 1993). To 
visualize the developing heart, a number of cardiac markers 
were examined, including ANF, MLC1A, MLC2A, MLC2V, 
~-MHC, and Nkx2.5. Plasmids for each of these markers were 
cut, and antisense transcripts were generated with XhoI and T7 
(ANF), EcoRI and T3 (MLC1A), BamHI and T7 (MLC2A), DdeI 
and T7 (MLC2V), HindIII and T7 (R-MHC), and XbaI and T7 
(Nkx2.5). A probe for GATA4 was used as an XhoI digest and T7 
product. 
The probes described above were generated as antisense RNA 
runoff products in the presence of digoxigenin-dUTP. Probe pro- 
cessing and the conditions for embryo hybridization and subse- 
quent immunodetection with AP-conjugated anti-digoxigenin 
antibody and colorization reaction were described previously 
(Barth and Ivarie 1994). Embryos for sectioning were processed 
as described previously (Kaufman 1992). 
RT-PCR analysis 
Two pools of three and four GATA4 null embryos and wild-type 
embryos were collected at E8.5 for total RNA extraction with 
Trizol reagent (GIBCO BRL). RNA was resuspended in 20 ~1 of 
water, and half was reverse transcribed with 5 units'of Moloney 
murine leukemia virus (Mo-MLV) reverse transcriptase in 20 ~1 
with 400 ~m dNTPs and 1 ~g of random hexamers (GIBCO BRL) 
at 42°C for 1 hr. The remaining half of RNA was used as a 
no-reverse transcriptase control. Added to a Taq polymerase- 
directed PCR reaction (1 unit) was 0.5 ~1 of these reactions with 
200 ~m dNTPs, 0.1 ~Ci of [a-'~2P]dCTP, and 1 ~M of each primer 
in a 50-~al reaction. Cycling conditions were as follows: dena- 
turation at 96°C for 30 sec, annealing at 58°C for 30 sec, and 
extension at 72°C for 45 sec for 20 cycles with both L7 primers 
and GATA6 primers and 25 cycles with GATA5 primers. The 
ribosomal control marker L7 was amplified with primers con- 
1070 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
GATA4 directs heart tube formation 
sisting of 5'-GAAGCTCATCTATGAGAAGGC (sense) and 5'- 
AAGACGAAGGAGCTGCAGAAC (antisense). GATA5 was 
amplified with primers consisting of 5'-CGACGTAGCC- 
CCTTCGTGG (sense) and 5-GCCACAGTGGTGTAGACAG 
(antisense), whereas GATA6 was amplified with primers con- 
sisting of 5'-CCCAGCGCAGACCTGTTGGAGGACC (sense) 
and 5'-TGTGACAGTTGGCACAGGACAG (antisense). Both 
the GATA5 and GATA6 product spanned at least one intron. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank A. Tizenor for assistance with graphics and J.A. Rawls 
and H.S. Baldwin for helpful discussions. We thank R. Beh- 
ringer, G. Lyons, G. Martin, and E. George for reagents and J.M. 
Leiden and C.T. Kuo for sharing information prior to publica- 
tion. This work was supported by grants from The National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), The Muscular Dystrophy Associa- 
tion, The Human Science Frontiers Program, and the American 
Heart Association to E.N.O.J.D.M. was supported by an NIH 
postdoctoral fellowship. 
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by 
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby 
marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 USC section 
1734 solely to indicate this fact. 
References 
Ang, S.L., A. Wierda, D. Wong, K.A. Stevens, S. Cascio, J. Ros- 
sant, and K.S. Zaret. 1993. The formation and maintenance 
of the definitive endoderm lineage in the mouse: Involve- 
ment of HNF-3/fork head proteins. Development 119" 1301- 
1316. 
Arceci, R.J., A.A.J. King, M.C. Simon, S.H. Orkin, and D.B. Wil- 
son. 1993. Mouse GATA-4: A retinoic acid-inducible GATA- 
binding transcription factor expressed in endodermally de- 
rived tissues and heart. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13" 2235-2246. 
Barnes, J.D., J.L. Crosby, C.M. Jones, C.V.E. Wright, and B.L.M. 
Hogan. 1994. Embryonic expression of Lim-1, the mouse ho- 
molog of Xenopus Xlim-1, suggests a role in lateral meso- 
derm differentiation and neurogenesis. Dev. Biol. 161: 168- 
178. 
Barth, J. and R. Ivarie. 1994. Polyvinyl alcohol enhances detec- 
tion of low abundance transcripts in early stage quail em- 
bryos in a nonradioactive whole mount in situ hybridization 
technique. BioTechniques 17: 324-327. 
Blobel, G.A., M.C. Simon, and S.H. Orkin. 1995. Rescue of 
GATA-l-deficient embryonic stem cells by heterologous 
GATA-binding proteins. MoI. Cell. Biol. 15" 626-633. 
Candia, A.F., J. Hu, J. Crosby, P.A. Lalley, D. Noden, J.H. 
Nadeau, and C.V.E. Wright. 1992. Mox-1 and Mox-2 define a 
novel homeobox gene subfamily and are differentiatlly ex- 
pressed during mesodermal patterning in mouse embryos. 
Development 116:1123-1136. 
Chen, J.-N., P. Haffter, J. Odenthal, E. Vogelsang, M. Brand, 
F.J.M. Van Eeden, M. Furutani-Seiki, M. Granato, M. Ham- 
merschmidt, C.-P. Heisenberg, Y.-J. Jiang, D.A. Kane, R.N. 
Kelsh, M.C. Mullins, and C. Nfisslein-Volhard. 1996. Muta- 
tions affecting the cardiovascular system and other internal 
organs in zebrafish. Development 123" 293-302. 
Chen, W.S., K. Manova, D.C. Weinstein, S.A. Duncan, A.S. 
Plump, V.R. Prezioso, R.F. Bachvarova, and J.E. Damell, Jr. 
1994. Disruption of the HNF-4 gene, expressed in visceral 
endoderm, leads to cell death in embryonic ectoderm and 
impaired gastrulation of mouse embryos. Genes & Dev. 
8" 2466-2477. Copp, A.J. 1995. Death before birth: Clues from gene knockouts 
and mutations. Trends Genet. 11: 87-93. 
DeHaan, R.L. 1963. Migration patterns of the precardiac meso- 
derm in the early chick embryo. Exp. Cell. Res. 29" 544-560. 
DeRuiter, M.C., R.E. Poelmann, I. VanderPlas-de Vries, M.M.T. 
Mentink, and A.C. Gittenberger-de Groot. 1992. The devel- 
opment of the myocardium and endocardium in mouse em- 
bryos. Anat. Embryol. 185" 461-473. 
Dorfman, D.M., D.B. Wilson, G.A.P. Bruns, and S.H. Orkin. 
1992. Human transcription factor GATA-2. J. Biol. Chem. 
267: 1279-1285. 
Duncan, S.A., K. Manova, W.S. Chen, P. Hoodless, D.C. Wein- 
stein, R.F. Bachvarova, and J.E. Darnell, Jr. 1994. Expression 
of transcription factor HNF-4 in the extraembryonic endb- 
derm, gut, and nephrogenic tissue of the developing mouse 
embryo: HNF-4 is a marker for primary endoderm in the 
implanting blastocyst. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91" 7598- 
7602. 
Duncan, S.A., A. Nagy, and W. Chan. 1997. Murine gastrulation 
requires HNF-4 regulated gene expression in the visceral en- 
doderm: Tetraploid rescue of HNF-4 -/- embryos. Develop- 
ment 124: 279-287. 
Evans, T. and G. Felsenfeld. 1989. The erythroid-specific tran- 
scription factor Eryfl: A new finger protein. Cell 58: 877- 
885. 
Gardner, R.L. 1983. Origin and differentiation of extra-embry- 
onic tissues in the mouse. Int. Rev. Exp. Pathol. 24" 63-133. 
Glueksohn-Schoenheimer, S. 1949. The effects of a lethal mu- 
tation responsible for duplication and twinning in mouse 
embryos. J. Exp. Zool. 110: 47-76. 
Gove, C., M. Walmsley, S. Nijjar, D. Bertwistle, M. Guille, G. 
Partington, A. Bomford, and R. Patient. 1997. Over-expres- 
sion of GATA-6 in Xenopus embryos blocks differentiation 
of heart precursors. EMBO J. 16" 355-368. 
Grepin, C., L. Dagnino, L.L. Robitaille, L.L. Haberstroh, T. An- 
takly, and M. Nemer. 1994. A hormone-encoding gene iden- 
tifies a pathway for cardiac but not skeletal muscle gene 
transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14:3115-3129. 
Grepin, C.L., L. Robitaille, T. Antakely, and M. Nemer. 1995. 
Inhibition of transcription factor GATA-4 expression blocks 
in vitro cardiac muscle differentiation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
15" 4095-4102. 
Healy, A.M., H.B. Rayburn, R.D. Rosenberg, and H. Weiler. 
1995. Absence of the blood-clotting regulator thrombo- 
modulin causes embryonic lethality in mice before the de- 
velopment of a functional cardiovascular system. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 92" 850-854. 
Heikinheimo, M., J.M. Scandrett, and D.B. Wilson. 1994. Local- 
ization of transcription factor GATA-4 to regions of the 
mouse embryo involved in cardiac development. Dev. Biol. 
164: 361-373. 
Ip, H.S., D.B. Wilson, M. Heikinheimo, Z. Tang, C.N. Ting, 
M.C. Simon, J.M. Leiden, and M.S. Parmacek. 1994. The 
GATA-4 transcription factor transactivates the cardiac 
muscle-specific troponin C promoter-enhancer in non- 
muscle cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14" 7517-7526. 
Jiang, Y. and T. Evans. 1996. The Xenopus GATA-4/5/6 genes 
are associated with cardiac specification and can regulate 
cardiac-specific transcription during embryogenesis. Dev. 
Biol. 174: 257-270. 
Kaufman, M.H. 1992. The atlas of mouse development (ed. 
M.H. Kaufman), pp. 2-5. Academic Press, San Diego, CA. 
Kelley, C., H. Blumberg, L.I. Zon, and T. Evans. 1993. GATA-4 
is a novel transcription factor expressed in endocardium of 
the developing heart. Development 118" 817-827. 
Ko, J.L. and J.D. Engel. 1993. DNA-binding specificies of the 
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 1071 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
Molkentin et al. 
GATA transcription factor family. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13:4011- 
4022. 
Laverriere, A.C., C. MacNeill, C. Mueller, R.E. Poelmann, J.B.E. 
Burch, and T. Evans. 1994. GATA 4/5/6, a subfamily of 
three transcription factors transcribed in developing heart 
and gut. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 23177-23184. 
Lee, M.E., D.H. Temizer, J.A. Clifford, and T. Quertermous. 
1991. Cloning of the GATA-binding protein that regulates 
endothelin-1 gene expression in endothelial cells. J. Biol. 
Chem. 266: 16188-16192. 
Lyons, I., L.M. Parsons, L. Hartley, R. Li, J.E. Andrews, L. Robb, 
and R.P. Harvey. 1995. Myogenic and morphogenetic defects 
in the heart tubes of murine embryos lacking the homeo box 
gene Nkx2.5. Gerles & Dev. 9" 1654-1666. 
Martin, D.I.K. and S.H. Orkin. 1990. Transcriptional activation 
and DNA binding by the erythroid factor GF-1/NF-EI/Eryfl. 
Genes & Dev. 4- 1886-1898. 
Martin, D.I.K., L.I. Zon, G. Mutter, and S.H. Orkin. 1990. Ex- 
pression of an erythroid transcription factor in megakaryo- 
cytic and mast cell lineages. Nature 344: 444-447. 
Matzuk, M.M., M.J. Finegold, J.-G.J. Su, A.J.W. Hsueh, and A. 
Bradley. 1992. Alpha-inhibin is a tumour-suppressor gene 
with gonadal specificity in mice. Nature 360: 313-319. 
Merika, M. and S.H. Orkin. 1993. DNA-binding specificity of 
the GATA family transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
13: 39994010. 
Molkentin, J.D., D. Kalvakalanou, and B.E. Markham. 1994. 
GATA-4 positively regulates expression of the ~-cardiac 
myosin heavy chain gene in vivo. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14: 4947- 
4957. 
Morrisey, E.E., H.S. Ip, M.M. Lu, and M.S. Parmacek. 1996. 
GATA-6: A zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed 
in multiple cell lineages derived from lateral mesoderm. 
Dev. Biol. 177: 309-322. 
Morrisey, E.E., H.S. Ip, Z. Tang, M.M. Lu, and M.S. Parmacek. 
1997. GATA-5: A transcriptional activator expressed in a 
novel temporally and spatially-restricted pattern during em- 
bryonic development. Dev. Biol. 183" 21-36. 
Nascone, N. and M. Mercola. 1996. Endoderm and cardiogen- 
esis: New insights. Trends Card. Med. 6" 211-216. 
Olson, E.N. and D. Srivastava. 1996. Molecular pathways con- 
trolling heart development. Science 272: 671-676. 
Omichinski, J.G., C. Trainor, T. Evans, A.M. Gronenborn, G.M. 
Clore, and G. Felsenfeld. 1993. A small single-"finger" pep- 
tide from the erythroid transcription fator GATA-1 binds 
specifically to DNA as a zinc or iron complex. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 90: 1676-1680. 
Orkin, S.H. 1992. GATA-binding transcription factors in hema- 
topoietic cells. Blood 80: 575-581. 
Pandolfi, P.P., M.E. Roth, A. Karis, M.W. Leonard, E. Dzierzak, 
F.G. Grosveld, J.D. Engel, and M.H. Lindenbaum. 1995. Tar- 
geted disruption of the GATA3 gene causes severe abnor- 
malities in the nervous system and in fetal liver haemato- 
poiesis. Nature Genet. 11" 40-44. 
Pevney, L., M.C. Simon, E. Robertson, W.H. Klien, S.-F. Tsai, V. 
D'Agati, S.H. Orkin, and F. Costantini. 1991. Erythroid dif- 
ferentiation in chimaeric mice blocked by a targeted muta- 
tion in the gene for transcription factor GATA-1. Nature 
349: 257-260. 
Ramirez-Solis, R., R. Davis, and A. Bradley. 1993. Gene target- 
ing in embryonic stem cells. Methods EnzymoI. 225: 855- 
878. 
Ruiz i Altaba, A., V.R. Prezioso, J.E. Darnell, and T.M. Jessell. 
1993. Sequential expression of HNF-3~ and HNF-3~ by em- 
bryonic organizing centers: The dorsal lip/node, notocord 
and floor plate. Mech. Dev. 44" 91-108. Sasaki, H. and B.L.M. Hogan. 1993. Differential expression of 
multiple fork head related genes during gastrulation and 
axial pattern formation in the mouse embryo. Development 
118: 47-59. 
Simeone, A., D. Acampora, A. Mallamaci, A. Stornaiuolo, M.R. 
D'Apice, V. Nigro, and E. Boncinelli. 1993. A vertebrate gene 
related to orthodenticle contains a homeodomain of the bi- 
coid class and demarcates anterior neuroectoderm in the gas- 
trulating mouse embryo. EMBO J. 12: 2735-2747. 
Soudais, C., M. Bielinska, M. Heikinheimo, C.A. MacArthur, N. 
Narita, J.E. Saffitz, M.C. Simon, J.M. Leiden, and D.B. 
Wilson. 1995. Targeted mutagenesis of the transcription fac- 
tor GATA-4 gene in mouse embryonic stem cells disrupts 
visceral endoderm differentiation in vitro. Development 
121: 3877-3888. 
Srivastava, D., P. Cserjesi, and E.N. Olson. 1995. A subclass of 
bHLH proteins required for cardiac morphogenesis. Science 
270: 1995-1999. 
Stainier, D.Y.R., B. Fouquet, J.-N. Chen, K.S. Warren, B.M. 
Weinstein, S.E. Meiler, M.-A.P.K. Mohideen, S.C.F. Neu- 
hauss, L. Solnica-Krezel, A.F. Schier, F. Zwartkruis, D.L. 
Stemple, J. Malicki, W. Driever, and M.C. Fishman. 1996. 
Mutations affecting the formation and function of the car- 
diovascular system in the zebrafish embryo. Development 
123: 285-292. 
Stalsberg, H. and R.L. DeHaan. 1968. Endodermal movements 
during foregut formation in the chick embryo. Dev. Biol. 
18: 198-215. 
Suzuki, H.R., M. Solursh, and H.S. Baldwin. 1995. Relationship 
between fibronection expression during gastrulation and 
heart formation in the rat embryo. Dev. Dynam. 204" 259- 
277. 
Thuerauf, D.J., D.S. Hanford, and C.C. Glembotski. 1994. Regu- 
lation of rat brain natriuretic peptide transcription. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269" 17772-17775. 
Ting, C.-N., M.C. Olson, K.P. Barton, and J.M. Leiden. 1996. 
Transcription factor GATA-3 is required for development of 
the T-cell lineage. Nature 384: 474-478. 
Tsai, F.Y., G. Keller, F.C. Kuo, M. Weiss, J. Chen, M. Rosenblatt, 
F.W. Alt, and S.H. Orkin. 1994. An early haematopoietic 
defect in mice lacking the transcription factor GATA-2. Na- 
ture 371: 221-226. 
Tsai, S.-F., D.I. Martin, L.I. Zon, A.D. D'Andrea, G.G. Wong, 
and S.H. Orkin. 1989. Cloning of the cDNA for the major 
DNA-binding protein of the erythroid lineage through ex- 
pression in mammalian cells. Nature 339: 446-451. 
Visvader, J.E., M. Crossley, J. Hill, S.H. Orkin, and J.M. Adams. 
1995. The C-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 or GATA-2 is 
sufficient to induce megakaryocytic differentiation of an 
early myeloid cell line. MoI. Cell. Biol. 15: 634-641. 
Wilson, D.B., D.M. Dorfman, and S.H. Orkin. 1990. A nonery- 
throid GATA-binding protein is required for function of the 
preproendothelin-1 promoter in endothelial cells. MoI. Cell. 
Biol. 10: 4854-4862. 
Yamamoto, M., L.J. Ko, M.W. Leonard, H. Beug, S.H. Orkin, and 
J.D. Engel. 1990. Activity and tissue-specific expression of 
the transcription factor NF-E1 multigene family. Genes & 
Dev. 4: 1650-1662. 
Yang, H.-Y. and T. Evans. 1992. Distinct roles for the two 
cGATA-1 finger domains. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12" 4562-4570. 
Zon, L.I., M.F. Gurish, R.L. Stevens, C. Mather, D.S. Reynolds, 
K.F. Austen, and S.H. Orkin. 1991. GATA-binding transcrip- 
tion factors in mast cells regulate the mast cell carboxypep- 
tidase A gene. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 22948-22953. 
1072 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  on June 26, 2014 - Published by genesdev.cshlp.org Downloaded from 
